
=for advent_title What do you give someone with a Birthday in the Holidays?

=for advent_author Bill Ricker 

=for advent_year 2007

=for advent_day 19

=begin quote

This is a bit of a departure from normal,
to continue the Community's celebration for Perl's 20th Birthday.

=end quote

Our favorite language turned 20 yesterday.
(I hope Perl doesn't go out and get really loaded next year.)
So I<what> did the community give to Perl this anniversary?

<UL>
<LI> A<http://use.perl.org/articles/07/12/18/2213209.shtml|Birthday Card delivered to Larry>
</LI>
<LI>and another Birthday Card A<http:../18/|here> </LI>
<LI> A<http://utsl.gen.nz/gitweb/?p=perl;a=tag;h=birthday-perl-3|Incomplete history of Perl> by A<http://use.perl.org/article.pl?sid=07/12/19/1648213|mugwumpjism> </LI>
<LI>Parrot 0.5.1 Released. I<Perl 6 lives!></LI>
<LI>B<Perl 5.10.0 Stable> A<http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2007/12/msg131636.html|Released>
and A<http://search.cpan.org/~rgarcia/perl-5.10.0|On CPAN>.
</LI>
</UL>

Perl 5.10?
What's that?
Is it just 5.8.9, rounding up? 
No, so much more than a maintenance release.
Is that like Perl 6, in time for B<this> Christmas?  
No, not really, but closer than some might imagine. 
And whatever it is, it I<is> in time for B<this> Christmas.  


First, and best for folks with legacy code 
(I<and with CPAN, that's all of us>),
5.10 is backwards compatible by default,
so I<can> be treated like a maintenance release of 5.8.x I<if you want to> 
(or I<need> to).
All new features are, by default, b<optional>, 
so won't break old code that doesn't import them by name or by announcing 5.10 intended.
Like other core module-pragmas, the aptly named F<feature> pragma
will bring in only the one's you've asked for (and learned?):
C<use feature qw/say ~~/;>
But we'll bring them in the easy way in out example.</LI>


So What new features are available? 


<UL>
<LI> Faster and pluggable RE/pattern matching engine 
(and stays faster even if no features are imported) </LI>
<LI>
Several syntax keywords and operators from Perl 6 are back-ported / prereleased in 5.10, including a case statement based on SmartMatch aka ~~ .</LI>
<LI>C<say> is like C<print> only shorter and with the free C<\n> of C<-l> mode I<for this one> output.
<LI> Named captures in RE matches.  </LI>
<LI> "possessive modifiers" and other back-track cut/commit control in RegEx
(like Prolog)</LI>  
<LI> stateful closure variables can be declared where needed
(rather than in an outer scope, either otherwise superfluous or *shudder* global)
</LI>
<LI> better error messages, especially B<which> variable was undef when
it should not have been, even if no features enabled.
</LI>
</UL>

So what will be our first Perl 5.10 program be, Hello World or a JAPH or something showing syntax?  TIMTOWTDI, so why choose!


=begin pre

	perl mod19.pl hello world 0 ' ' undef JaPh jApH

=end pre

=begin pre

	Hello World
	Hello World for the 2th time
	Hello 0 for the 3th time
	Hello 0 for the 4th time
	Hello World for the 5th time
	Hello Just another Perl 5.10 hacker for the 6th time
	Hello just Another perl 5.10 Hacker for the 7th time

=end pre


=sourcedcode mod19.pl

=begin eds

For more information on Perl 5.10 -

<UL>
<LI>Perl 5.10
A<http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2007/12/msg131636.html|Release note> </LI> 
<LI> Perl 5.10 source A<http://search.cpan.org/~rgarcia/perl-5.10.0|On CPAN>.
<LI>A<http://www.slideshare.net/rjbs/perl-510-for-people-who-arent-totally-insane|Ricardo SIGNES (rjbs)'s "Perl 5.10 for "Normal" Programmers"> from A<http://pghpw.org/ppw2007/talk/737|PPW>
</LI>
<LI> A<http://www.slideshare.net/acme/whats-new-in-perl-510|Acme's What's New > </LI>
<LI>Yves Orton's A<http://www.regex-engineer.org/slides/perl510_regex.html|Perl 5.10 Advanced RegEx's> from NPW/DPW/LPW </LI>
</LI>
<LI>
ActivePerl binary A<http://blogs.activestate.com/activestate/2007/12/merry-perl-mas.html|downloads> and 
</LI>
<LI>
Strawberry Perl 5.10.0 Release A<http://strawberryperl.com/download/strawberry-perl-5.10.0-final.exe|exe installer> and A<http://use.perl.org/~Alias/journal/35193|announcement>
</LI>
<LI>
<A HREF="http://use.perl.org/article.pl?sid=07/12/26/1628211"> What's new in Perl 5.10 - 4 micro articles</A> by GABOR.</A>
</LI>
<LI><A HREF="http://use.perl.org/article.pl?sid=08/01/07/1923242">
Relocatable</A>
</LI>
</UL>


