Naughty or Nice - Which CPAN authors will not have a heating problem?

=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 11

=for advent_title Should I expect help with my heating bill from Santa?

=for advent_author David Westbrook

One of the powers of Perl lays in F<CPAN> and the vast functionality within.
What's truly under the hood when we're C<use>-ing any particular module?
M<Module::ScanDeps> answers precisely that by recursively delving into their
innards. In even the simplest script, there's a lot of activity behind the
scenes:

=begin code

$ scandeps.pl -e 'use strict; print "Hello World"'
'Exporter'        => '5.63',
'AutoLoader'      => '5.67',
'Exporter::Heavy' => '5.63',
'List::Util'      => '1.19',
'threads::shared' => '1.27',
'XSLoader'        => '0.10',
'Scalar::Util'    => '1.19',

=end code

Once a script (or module) starts using other modules, and those modules use other modules,
there's an entire treeN<cpantesters> of code in use which cause be from any number of authors.
So, which of those authors have been I<naughty>, and which have been I<nice>?

First, we need to scan all the dependencies (lines 1-3).
Next, we'll need to create (lines 5-11) a look-up hash of the module names to authors -- this we obtain from a copy of the F<02packages.details.txt.gz> from a F<CPAN> mirror.

With those two hashes in hand, we can loop over (line 14) the modules,
exclude (line 15) the extraneous info,
and note what other modules this module uses (line 16).
And we also (lines 18-21) obtain the author for our look-up hash.

Now we can record an author as naughty if the module does neither C<use strict> nor C<use warnings>, and as nice if the modules does both. (Just one is neutral.)
For the lists, any author with any module with neither is naughty, and any non-naughty author with at least one with both is nice.

Using this against a 'random' module:

=begin code

$ perl mod11.pl /my/path/Pod/Advent.pm

=end code

We obtain the following:

=begin pre

Authors that have been nice (Red Ryder):
        JDHEDDEN
        DAVIDRW
        CHORNY
        GBARR

Authors that have been naughty (coal):
        FERREIRA
        GAAS
        RGARCIA
        HANK
        unknown
        SAPER
        ILYAZ
        ARANDAL

=end pre

Finally, a year without coal for me! :)

=sourcedcode mod11.pl

=begin footnote cpantesters

Elegantly displayed by the
A<http://deps.cpantesters.org/?module=Pod%3A%3AAdvent&perl=any+version&os=any+OS|http://deps.cpantesters.org>
service.

=end footnote

=begin eds

This module might also be useful in compiling a list to A<../10/|Bundle>.

=end eds
