Title: A Christmas Memory
Topic: Devel::MAT
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

"I just don't get it!"

An elf raising his voice was unheard of.  Normally softly spoken, Cedar
Greentrifle was several decibels above where his voice should have been and
getting louder.

"Mr Greentriffle", the Wise Old Elf interjected, "May I be of some assistance?"

"It's this baubling code! It keeps eating all the memory. And I can't work out
why!"

"Ah, then maybe this might be a good time to show you a tool I learned about
at the London Perl Workshop that might be just the ticket!"

=head2 Introducing Devel::MAT

Devel::MAT is a handy dandy command line tool that can help you work out exactly
what is taking up the memory in your Perl program.  You can trigger a dump
summarizing your program's memory usage at any point in the execution, then load
up the C<pmat> console and poke around in that dump to your heart's content
until you figure out exactly what went wrong.

Let's see how to use it on a simple example program that's going to allocate
a B<huge> string.

    #!/usr/bin/perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    my $elf = "happy";
    $elf x= 1024*1024*1024;  # 5 Gigs!

In order to analyze the memory usage in our code we need to alter it so that
it dumps a summary of the memory to a I<pmat> dump file during the execution
of the code.  The simplest way to do this is to add a C<die> statement...

    #!/usr/bin/perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    my $elf = "happy";
    $elf x= 1024*1024*1024;  # 5 Gigs!

    die;

..then run the same code with the Devel::MAT::Dumper module configured on the
command line to hook exception handling so that a dump file is written when the
die occurs:

    shell$ perl -MDevel::MAT::Dumper=-dump_at_DIE script.pl
    Dumping to /Users/Cedar/test/script.pl.pmat because of DIE
    Died at script.pl line 9.

This creates a I<pmat> dump file on disk named the same as our Perl script 
with an additional C<.pmat> extension:

    shell$ ls
    script.pl  script.pl.pmat

We can load this into the C<pmat> interactive console

    shell$ pmat script.pl.pmat
    Perl memory dumpfile from perl 5.22.0
    Heap contains 2366 objects
    pmat>

And away we go.  C<pmat> offers a bunch of commands, all of which can be listed
with the C<help> option.

    pmat> help
    callstack - Display the call stack
    count     - Count the various kinds of SV
    elems     - List the elements of an ARRAY SV
    find      - List SVs matching given criteria
    help      - Display a list of available commands
    identify  - Identify an SV by its referrers
    io        - Commands working with IO SVs
    largest   - Find the largest SVs by size
    roots     - Display a list of the root SVs
    show      - Show information about a given SV
    sizes     - Summarize object and byte counts across different SV types
    symbols   - Display a list of the symbol table
    values    - List the values of a HASH-like SV

=head2 Tracking down the largest things in your code

The C<largest> command can be very helpful in tracking down what's taking up
the most space:

    pmat> largest
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fab7d016a60: 5.0 GiB
    HASH(540) at 0x7fab7d002e90=strtab: 33.6 KiB
    INVLIST() at 0x7fab7e01bf88: 9.9 KiB
    INVLIST() at 0x7fab7e01c018: 9.8 KiB
    STASH(84) at 0x7fab7d0030d0=defstash: 3.1 KiB
    others: 228.5 KiB

There's our string, right there at the top: C<0x7fab7d016a60>.  Because our
example code was so simple we already know what scalar that is.  But, if we
didn't, we could easily ask pmat to identify it for us

    pmat> identify 0x7fab7d016a60
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fab7d016a60 is:
    \-the lexical $elf at depth 1 of CODE() at 0x7fab7d003478=main_cv, which is:
      \-the main code

Oh, that's obvious.  If our code is a little more complex then things are still
descriptive enough for us to understand what's happening.  For example:

    sub santas_workshop {
        my $phrase = "happy";

        my $elf = {
            attributes => {
                mood => scalar($phrase x (1024*1024*1024)),
                height => 'short',
            },
            name => 'Cedar Greentrifle'
        };

        die();
    }

Results in the identification:

    pmat> identify 0x7f9f9b011860
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7f9f9b011860 is:
    \-value {state} of HASH(1) at 0x7f9f9b003250, which is:
      \-(via RV) value {attr} of HASH(1) at 0x7f9f9b011878, which is:
        \-(via RV) the lexical $elf at depth 1 of CODE(PP) at 0x7f9f9b016a78, which is:
          \-the symbol '&main::santas_workshop'

So, we can easily identify large strings.  What about big data structures

    #!/usr/bin/perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    sub expand {
        my $count = shift() - 1;
        return "Merry Christmas" if $count == 0;
        return {
            map { $_ => expand($count) } 1..10
        };
    }

    my $big_data_structure = expand(6);
    die();


This creates a tree with a million copies of the string C<Merry Christmas> in
it.  What does C<pmat> make of this?

    Perl memory dumpfile from perl 5.22.0
    Heap contains 124628 objects
    pmat> largest
    HASH(548) at 0x7fb053002e90=strtab: 33.9 KiB
    INVLIST() at 0x7fb053085f88: 9.9 KiB
    INVLIST() at 0x7fb053086018: 9.8 KiB
    STASH(85) at 0x7fb0530030d0=defstash: 3.2 KiB
    HASH(70) at 0x7fb0530217c8: 2.7 KiB
    others: 10.4 MiB

Not so helpful, the largest thing is the C<strtab> (the cache of constant
strings used in our code itself.)  Not very helpful.

This is where the C<--owned> option for C<largest> comes in handy.  This
takes a while to execute, but it can work out cumlative

    pmat> largest --owned
    CODE() at 0x7fb053003478=main_cv: 10.2 MiB: of which
     |   PAD(3) at 0x7fb053003490: 10.2 MiB: of which
     |    |   REF() at 0x7fb053016ad8: 10.2 MiB
     |    |   HASH(10) at 0x7fb053011950: 10.2 MiB
     |    |   others: 10.2 MiB
     |   SCALAR(UV) at 0x7fb053016a60: 24 bytes
    STASH(85) at 0x7fb0530030d0=defstash: 70.4 KiB: of which
     |   GLOB(%*) at 0x7fb053017918: 22.6 KiB: of which
     |    |   STASH(2) at 0x7fb053021678: 22.4 KiB
     |    |   GLOB(%*) at 0x7fb053034d48: 22.1 KiB
     |    |   others: 22.1 KiB
     |   GLOB(%*) at 0x7fb053080b20: 14.6 KiB: of which
     |    |   STASH(39) at 0x7fb053080b38: 14.5 KiB
     |    |   GLOB(&*) at 0x7fb055015de0: 2.4 KiB
     |    |   others: 12.7 KiB
     |   GLOB(%*) at 0x7fb0530809e8: 3.9 KiB: of which
     |    |   STASH(3) at 0x7fb053080a60: 3.8 KiB
     |    |   GLOB(&*) at 0x7fb053080ad8: 3.3 KiB
     |    |   others: 3.3 KiB
     |   others: 26.1 KiB
    HASH(548) at 0x7fb053002e90=strtab: 33.9 KiB
    REF() at 0x7fb053085fb8: 10.0 KiB: of which
     |   ARRAY(5) at 0x7fb053085fd0: 10.0 KiB: of which
     |    |   INVLIST() at 0x7fb053085f88: 9.9 KiB
     |    |   SCALAR(UV) at 0x7fb053085fa0: 24 bytes
    REF() at 0x7fb0530f1450: 9.9 KiB: of which
     |   ARRAY(5) at 0x7fb053085fe8: 9.9 KiB: of which
     |    |   INVLIST() at 0x7fb053086018: 9.8 KiB
     |    |   SCALAR(UV) at 0x7fb0530f1438: 24 bytes
    others: 162.8 KiB

So the largest thing is unsurprisingly the main code.  It owns a C<REF()>
to a data structure at C<0x7fb053016ad8> that is just over ten megabytes in
size.  And if we identify that:

    pmat> identify 0x7fb053016ad8
    REF() at 0x7fb053016ad8 is:
    └─the lexical $big_data_structure at depth 1 of CODE() at 0x7fb053003478=main_cv, which is:
      └─the main code

...we see it's the C<$big_data_structure> we were expecting.

=head2 Tracking Down Leaks

Perl uses reference counting to keep track of memory.  When a data structure
has nothing pointing to it anymore (i.e. no variables point to it, no other
parts of a data structure point at it) it's unreachable by the program and
can be cleared away.

But what happens if we have a data structure point to itself?

    my $greeting;
    $greeting = {
        data => 'Merry Christmas',
        link => \$greeting,
    };

Perl will never be able to reclaim that.  The anonymous hash will always be
pointed to by the hash value, and the hash value will always be pointed to by
the anonymous hash.  When C<$greeting> goes out of scope this will leak memory.
Do that enough times and this will be the source of the extra memory your
program is using.

How can we find these?  It's tricky.  If the data structure is large enough
we can use the C<largest> technique above.  Otherwise, we can search for things
in the data structure to see if we've got more of these still hanging around
than we might expect.  For example:

    pmat> find pv --eq 'Merry Christmas'
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d56e3330: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d54fa2d0: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d57a0588: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d5052890: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d3901790: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d29b26a0: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d518f440: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d579dae0: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d391f868: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d2c7a2a8: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d5259f48: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d2c7b1a8: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d297ae00: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d2a53528: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d510f6a0: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d55ce980: "Merry Christmas"
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d401d0d8: "Merry Christmas"
    ...

C<identify> can tell us a little about each of these scalars (including that it
has a loop), but obviously not what variable holds them (because none does):

    pmat> identify 0x7fa2d56e3330
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d56e3330 is:
    \-value {data} of HASH(2) at 0x7fa2d56e3300, which is (*A):
      \-(via RV) the referrant of REF() at 0x7fa2d56e3348, which is:
        \-value {link} of HASH(2) at 0x7fa2d56e3300, which is:
          \-already found as *A

You might be temped to search for a hash key.  This won't go as well:

    pmat> find pv --eq 'data'
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d2003340: "data"

    pmat> identify 0x7fa2d2003340
    SCALAR(PV) at 0x7fa2d2003340 is:
    \-a constant of CODE() at 0x7fa2d2003478=main_cv, which is:
      \-the main code

That's because internally perl doesn't keep a copy of the hash key inside each
hash - the one and only scalar containing C<data> is the one perl created for
the constant string used in the code itself.

=head2 A Happy Elf

"I GOT IT I GOT IT I GOT IT"

"Mr Greentrifle! Please keep the noise down..."
