Author: Csaba Simándi <x1m4nd1@gmail.com>
Title: Lapland Packaging Department - Part 2
Topic: Carton

=encoding utf8

After getting to work on his second day, Tonttu quickly downloaded the L<Carton> module's tarball.
This was the chosen module to make the installation and packaging of other modules and projects easier.

Carton is capable of dependency handling, can download the source tarballs for modules and last but not least, can create a portable package for any project. This package can be copied to any machine and L<Carton> will install all modules automatically, without the need for an internet connection.
The nisse started to do some testing and cooked up the following proof of concept for Santa for the first part:

Tonttu made sure first, that Carton is installed on all servers in the warehouse.
He used the manual compilation method he had jotted down the day before.

After that he wrote the following guide for his busy elf colleagues:

=head2 Task 1. - Preparing the distribution

Create a C<cpanfile> for your project, listing all the used modules (of course only the ones not part of the Perl core, but installed extra).
List the minimum required Perl version for your project (if any) in the first line.

=begin code

# cpanfile
requires 'perl', '5.20.0';
requires 'Getopt::Long';
requires 'Data::Dumper';
requires 'Log::Log4perl';
requires 'MIME::Lite';
requires 'MIME::Types';
requires 'Mail::Address';
requires 'Net::SCP';
requires 'JSON';
requires 'DBI';
requires 'Excel::Writer::XLSX';

=end code

As you can see, only a handful of modules are in there, L<Carton> will automatically take care of the dependencies.

Next step is to C<carton install> the modules inside the C<local/> directory. 

=begin code 

$ carton install
Installing modules using /home/cabox/workspace/projects/test_carton/cpanfile
Successfully installed Archive-Zip-1.68
Successfully installed Excel-Writer-XLSX-1.09
Successfully installed Net-SSH-0.09
Successfully installed String-ShellQuote-1.04
Successfully installed Net-SCP-0.08
5 distributions installed
Complete! Modules were installed into /home/cabox/workspace/projects/test_carton/local

=end code 

Notice that after this step a file named C<cpanfile.snapshot> has been generated, with all the modules and depencencies managed by Carton.
As You can see from the below example there are way more modules in this file than in our list in the C<cpanfile>:

=begin code 

$ cat cpanfile.snapshot
# carton snapshot format: version 1.0
DISTRIBUTIONS
  Archive-Zip-1.68
    pathname: P/PH/PHRED/Archive-Zip-1.68.tar.gz
    provides:
      Archive::Zip 1.68
      Archive::Zip::Archive 1.68
      Archive::Zip::BufferedFileHandle 1.68
      Archive::Zip::DirectoryMember 1.68
      Archive::Zip::FileMember 1.68
      Archive::Zip::Member 1.68
      Archive::Zip::MemberRead 1.68
      Archive::Zip::MockFileHandle 1.68
      Archive::Zip::NewFileMember 1.68
      Archive::Zip::StringMember 1.68
      Archive::Zip::Tree 1.68
      Archive::Zip::ZipFileMember 1.68
    requirements:
      Compress::Raw::Zlib 2.017
      Encode 0
      ExtUtils::MakeMaker 0
      File::Basename 0
      File::Copy 0
      File::Find 0
      File::Path 0
      File::Spec 0.80
      File::Temp 0
      IO::File 0
      IO::Handle 0
      IO::Seekable 0
      Time::Local 0
      perl 5.006
  Excel-Writer-XLSX-1.09
    pathname: J/JM/JMCNAMARA/Excel-Writer-XLSX-1.09.tar.gz
    provides:
      Excel::Writer::XLSX 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Area 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Bar 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Column 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Doughnut 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Line 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Pie 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Radar 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Scatter 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chart::Stock 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Chartsheet 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Drawing 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Examples 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Format 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::App 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Comments 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::ContentTypes 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Core 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Custom 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Metadata 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Packager 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Relationships 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::SharedStrings 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Styles 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Table 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::Theme 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::VML 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Package::XMLwriter 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Shape 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Utility 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Workbook 1.09
      Excel::Writer::XLSX::Worksheet 1.09
    requirements:
      Archive::Zip 1.3
      ExtUtils::MakeMaker 0
      File::Temp 0.19
      IO::File 1.14
  Net-SCP-0.08.reprise
    pathname: I/IV/IVAN/Net-SCP-0.08.reprise.tar.gz
    provides:
      Net::SCP 0.08
    requirements:
      ExtUtils::MakeMaker 0
      IO::Handle 0
      Net::SSH 0
      String::ShellQuote 0
  Net-SSH-0.09
    pathname: I/IV/IVAN/Net-SSH-0.09.tar.gz
    provides:
      Net::SSH 0.09
    requirements:
      ExtUtils::MakeMaker 0
  String-ShellQuote-1.04
    pathname: R/RO/ROSCH/String-ShellQuote-1.04.tar.gz
    provides:
      String::ShellQuote 1.04
    requirements:
      ExtUtils::MakeMaker 0

=end code 

Don't forget to exclude the C<local/> directory and add the files C<cpanfile> and C<cpanfile.snapshot> to your version control system!

At this point we have a package, which is not really portable. To make it portable, run

=begin code 

$ carton bundle
Bundling modules using /home/cabox/workspace/projects/test_carton/cpanfile
Copying P/PH/PHRED/Archive-Zip-1.68.tar.gz
Copying J/JM/JMCNAMARA/Excel-Writer-XLSX-1.09.tar.gz
Copying I/IV/IVAN/Net-SCP-0.08.reprise.tar.gz
Copying I/IV/IVAN/Net-SSH-0.09.tar.gz
Copying R/RO/ROSCH/String-ShellQuote-1.04.tar.gz
Writing /home/cabox/workspace/projects/test_carton/vendor/cache/modules/02packages.details.txt.gz
Complete! Modules were bundled into /home/cabox/workspace/projects/test_carton/vendor/cache
It will bundle your tar archives into the vendor/ directory.

=end code 

Add C<vendor> to your VCS or don't, it's up to you.

Now we are ready to deploy the package to a different machine.

=head2 Task 2:  Deploying your Package to the Remote Machines

Copy the whole directory to the desired directory on the target systems.

This is the directory structure you should see (without your own stuff):

=begin code 		

.
|-- cpanfile
|-- cpanfile.snapshot
|-- ...  #Your stuff here
|-- ...	 #Your stuff here
`-- vendor
	`-- cache
	    |-- authors
	    `-- modules

=end code

Now it's time to install the modules using Carton (which has been previously installed by Tonttu):

=begin code 

$ carton install --deployment cached

=end code

This will use the module tarballs from the C<vendor/> directory and create C<local/> with the installed modules.

If therea are no errors, you may remove the C<vendor/> directory (optional).

Santa reviewed the proof of concept and was proud of Tonttu for doing such a great job. 

After sharing the how-to, all the elves started to use the L<Carton> packaging module and their job got a lot easier.

Santa was cheerful and satisfied, as the whole Packaging Department could fulfill more children's wishes much much faster than before.
