Author: Shoichi Kaji <skaji@cpan.org>
Title: Relocatable Perl
Topic: relocatable-perl

=encoding utf8

On May 2022, perl v5.36 was L<released|https://rjbs.cloud/blog/2022/05/perl-5.36/>.
Now I always write perl with

  use v5.36;

and I'm very excited to use new features.

Unfortunately I don't think too many people use perl v5.36 yet.
This is because I<system> perls are often out-of-date,
so people don't have many chances to use the latest perl.

It is true that you, an experienced Perl hacker, could build perl v5.36 by yourself.
But people who are not very familiar with Perl rarely build perl from source.

Some programming languages,
including L<nodejs|https://nodejs.org/en/download/> and
L<golang|https://go.dev/dl/>, provide their pre-built binaries.
This helps people get started and use the latest version of the languages.

I<So what if perl also provides its pre-built binaries?>

Because perl itself does not depend on external libraries (expect for glibc on linux, etc.),
it seems that we can prepare portable perl binaries for each OS/arch.
Additionally, since v5.10, perl can be built with
L<relocatable INC|https://metacpan.org/pod/release/XSAWYERX/perl-5.26.0/pod/perl5100delta.pod#Relocatable-installations>
so that we can relocate the perl tree wherever we want.

Well, I prepared pre-built L<relocatable-perls|https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl> for

=for :list
* linux amd64
* linux arm64
* macOS amd64
* macOS arm64 (for M1/M2 chips)

Are these useful? Let's give it a try!

=head1 Install relocatable-perls

There are 3 ways to install relocatable-perls.

=head2 Manually

You can manually download tarballs for your OS/arch
from L<release page|https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl/releases/latest>.
For example, if you use macOS with the M1 chip, then

  $ curl -fsSL -o perl-darwin-arm64.tar.xz https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl/releases/latest/download/perl-darwin-arm64.tar.xz
  $ tar xf perl-darwin-arm64.tar.xz
  $ mv perl-darwin-arm64 ~/wherever-you-want
  $ ~/wherever-you-want/bin/perl -v
  This is perl 5, version 36, subversion 0 (v5.36.0) built for darwin-2level

=head2 One liner

A helper script L<perl-install|https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl/blob/main/perl-install> helps you to install relocatable-perls:

  $ curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/skaji/relocatable-perl/main/perl-install | bash -s ~/perl

This installs the latest relocatable-perl into C<~/perl>.

=head2 plenv

If you use L<plenv|https://github.com/tokuhirom/plenv>,
then L<plenv-download|https://github.com/skaji/plenv-download> may be useful:

  $ git clone https://github.com/skaji/plenv-download $(plenv root)/plugins/plenv-download
  $ plenv download latest
  Downloading https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl/releases/download/5.36.0.1/perl-darwin-amd64.tar.xz
  Unpacking /Users/skaji/env/plenv/cache/relocatable-5.36.0.1/perl-darwin-amd64.tar.xz
  Successfully installed 5.36.0.1

=head1 How to use relocatable-perls

You can use relocatable-perls just like your usual perls.
I have been using relocatable-perls for 8 years and
don't have any particular problems.

Relocatable-perls come with L<cpanm|https://metacpan.org/pod/App::cpanminus>
so that you are ready to use CPAN modules!

  $ cpanm -nq Plack
  $ plackup -p 8080 -e 'sub {[200,[],["hello world!"]]}'
  HTTP::Server::PSGI: Accepting connections at http://0:8080/

=head1 Conclusion

I think pre-built binaries helps people get started with perl and use the latest version of perl.
I prepared L<relocatable-perls|https://github.com/skaji/relocatable-perl>
so that you can give it a try now!

=cut
