=encoding utf-8

=head2 New logistics

With slavery being questioned all around the world, quite a few elves rioted and
turned their back on Santa. He is now facing a downsized force of helpers and
has to work even more efficient than ever before.

Especially the logistics department was cut down to a number that made production
of toys a nightmare, as the production department has no idea how many toys to
make and with what specifications.

The mail group already being reduced in size last year now works way more
efficiently, as they are capable to control the annexes in the countries that
collect the wish-lists. They now use CSV files. Or do they?

Due to locales and local regulations, all the country annexes use their local
settings to produce the CSV files with the gathered wish-lists. These are then
sent to the North Pole where the mail department collects, sorts and distributes
them to the logistics department that will then steer the production.

That plan sounds fine, until they note that the Dutch use a semicolon for
separation character, the Romanians use UTF-16LE encoding, the Spanish lists
come with \r\n line endings and the Germans keep misspelling count as kount.
They chose CSV as the definition was so easy nothing could go wrong. Well, now
they have to think again.

How many Red Fire Trucks will production have to make so logistics can set up a
scheme for Santa to not have to return to the Pole if does not have enough red
trucks to fulfill the children's wishes.

=head2 Data received

The master elf showed his programmers the format of the wish-list he got from
the UK department, named wish-uk.csv:

 Name,Date of Birth,Postal Code,Address,Wish,Specs
 Hilbert Potter,20121220,NE66 1NQ,Alnwick Castle,Wand,"10Â¾"" Vine w/ dragon heartstring"
 Jane Granger,20111111,NE13 6LY,"Random Edge, Warkworth Drive",Magic beaded handbag,Unlimited space
 Wolff Weasly,20131211,NE13 5AX,The Grove,Wand,Crooked oak w/ Muggle blood

=head3 Basic knowledge

The logistic elves are fond of the features perl offers them, so they start out
the simple way:

 use Text::CSV_XS qw( csv );

 my $aoa = csv (in => "wish-uk.csv");

and they say all went well. They showed the master elf the content using

 use Data::Peek;

 DDumper ($aoa);

and it showed

  [
      [   'Name',
          'Date of Birth',
          'Postal Code',
          'Address',
          'Wish',
          'Specs'
          ],
      [   'Hilbert Potter',
          20121220,
          'NE66 1NQ',
          'Alnwick Castle',
          'Wand',
          '10Â¾" Vine w/ dragon heartstring'
          ],
      [   'Jane Granger',
          20111111,
          'NE13 6LY',
          'Random Edge, Warkworth Drive',
          'Magic beaded handbag',
          'Unlimited space'
          ],
      [   'Wolff Weasly',
          20131211,
          'NE13 5AX',
          'The Grove',
          'Wand',
          'Crooked oak w/ Muggle blood'
          ]
      ]

=head3 Advanced knowledge

The master elf suggested to use the headers

  DDumper csv (in => "wish-uk.csv", headers => "auto");

  [
      {   Address          => 'Alnwick Castle',
          'Date of Birth'  => 20121220,
          Name             => 'Hilbert Potter',
          'Postal Code'    => 'NE66 1NQ',
          Specs            => '10Â¾" Vine w/ dragon heartstring',
          Wish             => 'Wand'
          },
      {   Address          => 'Random Edge, Warkworth Drive',
          'Date of Birth'  => 20111111,
          Name             => 'Jane Granger',
          'Postal Code'    => 'NE13 6LY',
          Specs            => 'Unlimited space',
          Wish             => 'Magic beaded handbag'
          },
      {   Address          => 'The Grove',
          'Date of Birth'  => 20131211,
          Name             => 'Wolff Weasly',
          'Postal Code'    => 'NE13 5AX',
          Specs            => 'Crooked oak w/ Muggle blood',
          Wish             => 'Wand'
          }
      ]

and the programming elves were in awe for they did not expect the master elf to
know about this magic. They then started to read the manual ...

=head3 Planning the trips

The sleigh is not of unlimited size - in contrary of common belief - and cannot
hold unlimited weight (due to reindeer fatigue), so Santa must plan well in
advance how many presents he can take on a single trip.

The aim of the logistical elves was to count presents per region, so they were
not interested in the personal data. Just the postal code and the wish-list
item were important (for the planning department).  On their efforts they also
decided that they just wanted to count on the first part of the postal code

  my %count;
  my $aoa = csv (in => "wish-uk.csv", headers => "auto", filter => {
      1 => sub { $count{$_{Wish}}{$_{"Postal Code"} =~ s/\s.*//r}++; 0; }});

  DDumper \%count;

  {   'Magic beaded handbag' => {
          NE13             => 1
          },
      Wand             => {
          NE13             => 1,
          NE66             => 1
          }
      }

Happy with the result they now wanted to combine that with their own knowledge
on the size and the weight of the presents, which they stored as

  present,weight,size
  wand,0.2,1
  handbag,1,2

They had a long session on how to match the wish description with the present
data they had, and came up with what they think was accurate enough:

  use List::Util   qw( sum first );
  use Text::CSV_XS qw( csv );

  my $props = csv (in => "presents.csv", key => "present");

  my %count;
  my $aoa = csv (in => "wish-uk.csv", headers => "auto", filter => {
      1 => sub {
          $count{$_{Wish}}{$_{"Postal Code"} =~ s/\s.*//r}++;
          0;
          }
      });

  my @presents = keys %$props;
  my %ship;

  foreach my $wish (keys %count) {
      my $w = lc $wish;
      my ($weight, $size, $p);
      if ($p = $props->{$w}) {
          ($weight, $size) = ($p->{weight}, $p->{size});
          $p = $w;
          }
      elsif ($p = first { $_ } grep m/\b $w \b/x => @presents or
             $p = first {     $w =~ m/\b $_ \b/x }  @presents) {
          ($weight, $size) = ($props->{$p}{weight}, $props->{$p}->{size});
          }
      else {
          ($weight, $size) = (1, 1);
          }

      foreach my $postal (keys %{$count{$wish}}) {
          my $n = $count{$wish}{$postal};
          $ship{$postal}{presents}{$wish} = {
              present => $p // "unknown",
              weight  => $weight,
              size    => $size,
              count   => $n,
              };
          $ship{$postal}{count}  += $n;
          $ship{$postal}{size}   += $n * $size;
          $ship{$postal}{weight} += $n * $weight;
          }
      }

  DDumper \%ship;

 =>

  {   NE13             => {
          count            => 2,
          presents         => {
              'Magic beaded handbag' => {
                  count            => 1,
                  present          => 'handbag',
                  size             => 2,
                  weight           => 1
                  },
              Wand             => {
                  count            => 1,
                  present          => 'wand',
                  size             => 1,
                  weight           => '0.2'
                  }
              },
          size             => 3,
          weight           => '1.2'
          },
      NE66             => {
          count            => 1,
          presents         => {
              Wand             => {
                  count            => 1,
                  present          => 'wand',
                  size             => 1,
                  weight           => '0.2'
                  }
              },
          size             => 1,
          weight           => '0.2'
          }
      }

=head3 Planning production

Using the same wish-list data, they can control the production department. They
just need to know how many presents they should manufacture and with what specs.
They are not interested at all in where the presents will be shipped or who will
be the happy child to receive the present.

To get the right data to production they still need the present properties in
order to categorize the presents. This turned out to be very easy:

  my $props = csv (in => "presents.csv", key => "present");
  my @presents = keys %$props;

  my %count;
  my $aoa = csv (in => "wish-uk.csv", headers => "auto", filter => {
      1 => sub {
          my $w = lc $_{Wish};
          my $p = $props->{$w} ? $w
                : (first { $_ } grep m/\b $w \b/x => @presents) ||
                  (first {     $w =~ m/\b $_ \b/x }  @presents) || $w;
          $count{$p}{$w}{$_{Specs}}++;
          0;
          },
      });

 =>

  {   handbag          => {
          'magic beaded handbag' => {
              'Unlimited space' => 1
              }
          },
      wand             => {
          wand             => {
              '10¾" Vine w/ dragon heartstring' => 1,
              'Crooked oak w/ Muggle blood' => 1
              }
          }
      }

=head2 More of Europe

So, with the UK covered, let's see what the Dutch and the Germans sent to Santa.

The Dutch sent Santa:

 naam;geboortedatum;postcode;adres;wens;specificaties
 Gordon;19680706;1000AZ;Blaricum;handbag;pink size 12
 Chantal Janzen;19790215;1071HW;Willemsparkweg;handbag;Dior, black

The Germans sent Santa:

 Name,Geburtstag,PostLeitzahl,Wunsch,Spezifikationen
