Author: olaf@wundersolutions.com
Title: Elves Versus Typos
Topic: https://crates.io/crates/typos

=encoding utf8

When you're constantly producing things like toys and code, mistakes will
happen. Some will be easy to spot and others may elude you. Santa knows that
attention to detail counts. The elves know that if Santa finds a typo in their
documentation or their code, he will immediately ask himself what else may be
wrong. In order to avoid the impression of carelessness, the elves have
automated the finding and fixing of typos.

=head2 The Tool

Strangely enough, one of the tools which the elves have in their toolkit is the
L<typos|https://crates.io/crates/typos> utility. Now, this tool is not written
in Perl, but rather in Rust. This bothers exactly nobody, since the elves use
the right tool for the right job. The wonderful thing about C<typos> is that
this Rust-based tool can improve their Perl code. It's a Christmas miracle!

=head2 Getting Set Up

After installing C<typos>, it's trivial to spot typos in code.

  $ typos

That's it! Now, let's try it on the Advent Calendar. We'll start with the
articles in 2019.

  $ typos 2019

This gives us all sorts of helpful information.

    typos 2019
    error: `entires` should be `entries`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-16.pod:253:23
        |
    253 | And start adding todo entires:
        |                       ^^^^^^^
        |
    error: `hightlight` should be `highlight`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-14.pod:113:56
        |
    113 |         # work out the three strings (left of / before hightlight,
        |                                                        ^^^^^^^^^^
        |
    error: `hightlight` should be `highlight`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-14.pod:114:24
        |
    114 |         # the middle / hightlight, and then right of / after highlight)
        |                        ^^^^^^^^^^
        |
    error: `assing` should be `assign`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-14.pod:121:27
        |
    121 |         # what we want to assing to $x so we start drawing there again.


There are actually a few more typos, but this is a good demonstration of what
we might find. Now, how do we fix it?

  $ typos -w 2019

    error: `fils` should be `fills`, `files`, `file`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-20.pod:136:59
        |
    136 | if that machine can access the internet, if I can put the fils in my home
        |                                                           ^^^^
        |
    error: `whe` should be `when`, `we`
      --> 2019/articles/2019-12-19.pod:25:17
       |
    25 | between runs.", whe Wise Old Elf explained sagely, "Then you'd be able to
       |                 ^^^
       |

This actually fixes a number of typos, but there are two which the tool cannot
resolve, so it makes some suggestions for us to use in a manual fix.

This leaves the matter of how many changes were actually made. Let's see:

    $ git diff --stat 2019
     2019/articles/2010-12-11.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-04.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-05.pod | 4 ++--
     2019/articles/2019-12-07.pod | 4 ++--
     2019/articles/2019-12-10.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-12.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-13.pod | 8 ++++----
     2019/articles/2019-12-14.pod | 6 +++---
     2019/articles/2019-12-16.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-18.pod | 6 +++---
     2019/articles/2019-12-20.pod | 4 ++--
     2019/articles/2019-12-21.pod | 4 ++--
     2019/articles/2019-12-22.pod | 2 +-
     2019/articles/2019-12-24.pod | 2 +-
     14 files changed, 25 insertions(+), 25 deletions(-)

We can now go over the changes individually via C<git add -p> and we'll find
that all but one seem to be correct. 24 typos found and fixed in 47 ms. That's
not bad at all.

As we process more and more files, we will like find some false positives which
we want to correct. This can be done in a config file. Ours is C<typos.toml>.

    [default.extend-words]
    ANDed = "ANDed"
    ba = "ba"
    Claus = "Claus"
    DNE = "DNE"
    IFF = "IFF"
    Signes = "Signes"

    [files]
    extend-exclude = ["advent.ini", "data.en"]

In order to skip false positives, we add words to the C<default.extend-words>
section. Yes, it's kind of a surprising way to do this, but let's go along with
it. Also, any files which we don't want to check can be added to
C<extend-include> in the C<[files]> section.

=head2 More Than Just Documentation

The neat thing about C<typos> is that it can also fix things in your Perl code
itself and not just the documentation.

Imagine we have a Perl script with the following contents:

    #!vim perl
    use strict;
    use warnings;

    sub widht {}

    my $strng = 'foo';

What does C<typos> have to say about it?

    typos workshop.pl
    error: `widht` should be `width`
      --> workshop.pl:4:5
      |
    4 | sub widht {}
      |     ^^^^^
      |
    error: `strng` should be `string`
      --> workshop.pl:6:5
      |
    6 | my $strng = 'foo';
      |     ^^^^^
      |

We can see that our function name and our variable name have been caught and
will be corrected if we run again with C<typos -w>.

=head2 Now The Elves Look Smart(er)

Having discovered this very useful tool, the elves have added it to their
linters and fixers, made it part of their C<pre-commit> hooks and included it
in the Continuous Integration configuration.

For those of us who enjoy creating a quick pull request to fix someone else's
typos, we can now employ this tool on repositories which we have just checked
out. A helpful pull request for a grateful maintainer
is just minutes away.

As one more data point, I used C<typos> to check this very article and I'm
both proud and ashamed to say that it found more than one problem. 😅

C<typos> will not find all errors, but it will find issues which are hard for
the human eye to spot. It's not a replacement for a code review, but it's a
helpful tool for the elves to have in their toolbox for the days when they just
don't see the typos which are staring them in the face. The best part is, they
get to find the typos before Santa does.
