Title: Regex::Common
Topic: Regex::Common
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

=for :html
<div class="bestof">
2020 has been time consuming - a global pandemic, giant fires, horrific floods
and political unrest - which has left us little time for side projects.
This year we're looking back to happier times into the 20+ year archive with the
Best of the Perl Advent Calendar.
</div>

Are you fed up writing the same regexes over and over again?  Even
though someone's bound to have written (and debugged) them a hundred
times already.

Someone should put a module of a collection of them up on the CPAN.
Oh, wait, someone did.

Suppose you want to make sure a scalar has something that looks like
a number in it.  It's a fairly simple regex to write, right?

    #!perl
    $scalar =~ /^\d+$/;

That's

    #!perl
    $scalar =~ /^    # start of line 
                \d   # digit
                +    # one or more times
                $    # till the end of line
               /x;   # allow me to split the line up like this</pre>

Of course, that falls over as soon as someone puts in a floating
point number.

    #!perl
    3.14159265   # the dot doesn't match \d

So we need to expand that to cover situations where there might
optionally be extra bits on the end

    #!perl
    $scalar =~ /^    # start of line 
                \d   # digit
                +    # one or more times
                (    # group for floating point part
                 \.  # literal dot
                 \d  # digit
                 +   # one or more times
                )    # end group for floating point type
                ?    # group may or may not exist (is optional)
                $    # till the end of line
               /x;   # allow me to split the line up like this</pre>

Which works fine until someone does this:

    #!perl
    -2.71828183</pre>

So we have to modify it to have an optional plus or minus sign at
the start:

    #!perl
    $scalar =~ /^    # start of line 
                [+-] # plus or minus
                ?    # which is optional
                \d   # digit
                +    # one or more times
                (    # group for floating point part
                 \.  # literal dot
                 \d  # digit
                 +   # one or more times
                )    # end group for floating point type
                ?    # group may or may not exist (is optional)
                $    # till the end of line
               /x;   # allow me to split the line up like this</pre>

And guess what...then someone writes this:

   #!perl
   6.626068e10-34

And we get really annoyed.  At this point I'm writing so much code
that I have the distinct urge to write some tests.  But more than
this I get to thinking...wouldn't it be I<nice> if someone had written
this already.  It's a fairly common occurrence - it's not like we're
the first people ever to want to match a number.

And then we look in Regex::Common.  Lo and behold!  There's one there to
do it!  Remind me again why I'm writing my own code?

Using B<Regex::Common> exports a hash C<%RE> into our namespace.  This
hash contains many compiled regexes which we an use in our regular
expressions.  For example:

    #!perl
    $scalar =~ /$RE{num}{real}/;

B<Regex::Common> also provides a subroutine method to get at the
regexes, if you prefer to use it like that:

    #!perl
    use Regex::Common 'RE_ALL';
    my $regex = RE_num_real();
    if ($scalar =~ $regex)
      { print "It matched!" }

In either case the regexes are blessed, meaning you can call methods
on them and treat them just like they're objects.

    #!perl
    my $num_regex = $RE{num}{real};
    if ($num_regex-&gt;match($scalar))
      { print "It matched!" }

One thing you can say about B<Regex::Common>, it provides a lot of
syntactic sugar.

=head2 What Regex::Common can match

I'm not going to provide examples of everything that B<Regex::Common>
can match - that would take forever and a day.  I'm just going to touch
on some of the things that I've found most useful.

Aside from number matching, the one regular expression set I've found
the most useful is the profanity matching.  This is impossible to do
properly without really annoying the residents of Middlesex and
Scunthorpe by blocking out the inappropriate words in their place names,
and you can only provide basic checking that's 'good enough'.
B<Regex::Common> provides a collection that's 'good enough' from the
outset, and means I no longer have to worry about constructing such
things.

There's one or two regexes in the collection that I could easily 
write but are really tiresome to do each time and - as always
when you write code rather than reusing existing known good code - 
you run the risk of making a mistake or typo;  The ones that spring
particularly to mind are the code for removing whitespace from the
start or end of strings, and the code for removing comments from
text.

Straying onto more advanced territory there's even code for matching
balanced brackets, something that strictly in a mathematical sense
a regular expression shouldn't be able to do (but Perl can because
it's regular expressions aren't that regular.)

Then there's some clever stuff in there to match lists, where you
can have things like "rod, jane, and freddy" and get the results
back carefully dumping things like "and".

I could go on all day like this...have a look around in the
list of modules yourself: http://search.cpan.org/dist/Regexp-Common/

