Title: How Santa's Elves Keep their Workshop Tidy
Topic: Code::TidyAll
Author: Olaf Alders <olaf@wundersolutions.com>

=for :html
<div class="bestof">
2020 has been time consuming - a global pandemic, giant fires, horrific floods
and political unrest - which has left us little time for side projects.
This year we're looking back to happier times into the 20+ year archive with the
Best of the Perl Advent Calendar.
</div>

L<Code::TidyAll> bills itself as
C<< Your all-in-one code tidier and validator >>. Many people do not know this,
but C<< tidyall >> has become an indispensable part of the toolkit in Santa's
workshop.  It makes it trivial for the elves to keep their code formatting
consistent and clean.

=head2 Perl::Tidy

Many of us are familiar with L<Perl::Tidy> (the Perl module for reformatting
your source code in a consistent manner according to a set of rules,) so we'll
start with it as an example.  Since the elves work as a team, it's easiest for
them to add their common C<< .perltidyrc >> to their Git repository.  Next they
create an rc file for the C<< tidyall >> command line utility.  They add this to
the top level of their repository and call it C<< .tidyallrc >>:

    #!vim dosini
    [PerlTidy]
    select = {bin,lib,t}/**/*.{pl,pm,t,psgi}
    select = santas-workshop.psgi
    ignore = lib/Acme/Claus/Roles/JellyBelly.pm
    argv = --profile=$ROOT/.perltidyrc

Each section of a C<< .tidyallrc >> file begins by specifying the
tidier/formatter which is being configured.  In this case it's the
L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::PerlTidy> plugin which plugs L<Perl::Tidy> into
C<< tidyall >>.  The C<< select >> args accept L<File::Zglob> patterns (i.e.
shell glob pattern).  This allows the elves to configure which files the plugin
should be applied to.  Similarly, they can also add C<< ignore >> patterns to
exclude arbitrary files and patterns.

The C<< argv >> param lets the elves specify a set of arguments to pass to
L<Perl::Tidy>.  In this case the elves use the C<< profile >> arg, which tells
C<< perltidy >> where to find a valid C<< .perltidyrc file >>.  C<< $ROOT >> is a
special variable provided by C<< tidyall >> which means the top level of the
repository it has been added to.

Now, they're all set.  C<< tidyall -a >> will tidy everything which matches the
C<< select >> statements in the configuration.  C<< tidyall -g >> is much like
C<< tidyall -a >> but it is restricted to all files which have been changed but
not yet committed to the git repository they're currently working in.

Let's have a look at an example.  This is the repository the elves are working
on:

    $ tree
    .
    |-- Changes
    |-- MANIFEST.SKIP
    |-- dist.ini
    |-- lib
    |   `-- Acme
    |        `-- Claus
    |        |    `-- Roles
    |        |    |    `-- JellyBelly.pm
    |        |    `-- Sleigh.pm
    |        `-- Claus.pm
    `-- santas-workshop.psgi

Let's ask C<< tidyall >> to check everything, using the C<< -a >> flag.

    $ tidyall -a
    [tidied]  lib/Acme/Claus.pm
    [checked] lib/Acme/Claus/Sleigh.pm
    [checked] santas-workshop.psgi

You can see from the above that tidyall only checked the files that we
configured it to look at.  Now, what if we only want to check the files which
have uncommitted changes in Git.

    $ git status
    On branch master
    Changes not staged for commit:
    (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
    (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

    modified:   lib/Acme/Claus.pm

We have one modified file, C<< lib/Acme/Claus.pm >>.  So, let's constrain this
further and use the C<< -g >> flag.  This should mean that only one file gets
checked and possibly tidied.

    tidyall -g
    [tidied]  lib/Acme/Claus.pm

It worked!  At this point the elves essentially have a wrapper around
C<< perltidy >>, which lets them restrict which files the transformations are
applied to.  Helpful, right?  Let's take it a step further.  Two of the elves on
the gifting geolocation team, Holly and Max, are pretty good about tidying their
files before they commit them to the workshop's main repo.  However, the other
half of the team, Buddy and Peppermint aren't quite so disciplined.  How can
Holly and Max ensure that Buddy and Peppermint work together with the rest of
the team?  Well, since they're using Git, there are a few things they can do.
(This would be a good time to note that C<< tidyall >> has Subversion support
too.)

=head2 No Untidy Code Makes it Past this Hook

The first thing Holly and Max can try is using a pre-commit hook.  Setting it up
is easy.

    mkdir -p git/hooks

Now create git/hooks/pre-commit with the following content:

    #!perl
    #!/usr/bin/env perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    use Code::TidyAll::Git::Precommit;
    Code::TidyAll::Git::Precommit->check();

Then create git/setup.sh

    #!vim sh
    #!/bin/bash
    chmod +x git/hooks/pre-commit
    cd .git/hooks
    ln -s ../../git/hooks/pre-commit

Now, all Holly and Max need to do is tell Buddy and Peppermint to check out the
latest commits from master and run the following command:

    sh git/setup.sh

This will set up a hook which runs before any git commit in the local repo is
finalized.  Note that the hook will not tidy your files.  It will merely warn
you about untidy code and prevent the commit.  (You can get the same behaviour
at the command line by supplying the C<< --check-only >> arg).  At this point you
can check what the problems are and then run C<< tidyall -g >> as appropriate.
Then be sure to perform your tidying before you commit.  If you don't,
C<< tidyall >> will be fooled into thinking that your commits are clean, even
if you haven't staged the tidied bits.

For example, what happens if someone tries to commit untidy code?

    $ git commit
    [checked] lib/Acme/Claus.pm
    *** needs tidying
    1 file did not pass tidyall check

In a traditional git setup it's also possible to install similar pre-receive
hooks that run on the main repository whenever someone pushes code to it.
However, since Santa's workshop runs Github Enterprise - where pre-receive hooks
aren't possible without some wrangling - pre-commit hooks and a strong lecture
on always installing them clientside will have to do.

=head2 Testing to Keep Buddy and Peppermint in Line

Now, it's entirely possible that someone will forget to enable the hook or even
intentionally bypass it.  (You can do this with C<< git commit --no-verify >>).
Let's put another safeguard in place to catch the naughty elves.

Let's create a file called t/tidyall.t and add the following lines:

    #!perl
    #!/usr/bin/perl
    use Test::Code::TidyAll;
    tidyall_ok();

Now we'll have a failing test whenever something untidy makes it into the master
branch.  Holly and Max are now safe in the knowledge that whenever untidy code
is tested via their CS (continuous santagration) that the test suite will curse
loudly and the perpetrator(s) will be exposed.  In fact, it should look a little
bit like this:

    $ prove t/tidyall.t
    t/tidyall.t ..
    1..4
    [checked] lib/Acme/Claus.pm
    *** needs tidying
    # *** needs tidying
    not ok 1 - lib/Acme/Claus.pm

    #   Failed test 'lib/Acme/Claus.pm'
    #   at t/tidyall.t line 3.
    ok 2 - lib/Acme/Claus/Sleigh.pm
    ok 3 - santas-workshop.psgi
    [checked] t/tidyall.t
    ok 4 - t/tidyall.t
    # Looks like you failed 1 test of 4.
    Dubious, test returned 1 (wstat 256, 0x100)
    Failed 1/4 subtests

    Test Summary Report
    -------------------
    t/tidyall.t (Wstat: 256 Tests: 4 Failed: 1)
    Failed test:  1
    Non-zero exit status: 1
    Files=1, Tests=4,  1 wallclock secs ( 0.03 usr  0.01 sys +  0.24 cusr  0.02 csys =  0.30 CPU)
    Result: FAIL

=head2 Can the Elves add a vim Key Binding?

Of course.  They can add the following to their .vimrc file:

    " Run tidyall on the current buffer. If an error occurs, show it and leave it
    " in tidyall.ERR, and undo any changes.

    command! TidyAll :call TidyAll()
    function! TidyAll()
    let cur_pos = getpos( '.' )
    let cmdline = ':1,$!tidyall --mode editor --pipe %:p 2> tidyall.ERR'
    execute( cmdline )
    if v:shell_error
    echo "\nContents of tidyall.ERR:\n\n" . system( 'cat tidyall.ERR' )
    silent undo
    else
    call system( 'rm tidyall.ERR' )
    endif
    call setpos( '.', cur_pos )
    endfunction

    " Uncomment to set leader to ,
    " let mapleader = ','

    " Bind to ,t (or leader+t)
    map <leader>t :TidyAll<cr>

There may also be the odd elf who swears by emacs.  The emacs code can be found
in the repository L<https://github.com/autarch-code/perl-code-tidyall/blob/master/etc/editors/tidyall.el>

=head2 What next?

So far we have perltidy set up, we have a Git hook to enforce it and a test to
make sure the hook is being enforced.  What's next?

The great thing about this module is that it has many plugins, so it's not just
about tidying Perl code.  You can add any of the following plugins to your projects:

=for :list
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::CSSUnminifier>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::Go>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::JSBeautify>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::JSHint>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::JSLint>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::JSON>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::MasonTidy>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::PHPCodeSniffer>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::PerlCritic>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::PodChecker>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::PodSpell>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::SVG>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::SortLines>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::SortLines::Naturally>
* L<Code::TidyAll::Plugin::UniqueLines>

With this much plugin support C<< tidyall >> can be used for front end as well
as back end development.  As mentioned above, it works with Subversion as well
as Git.  It helps Santa's elves keep their workshop clean and tidy.  Maybe it
can help your workshop as well.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Code::TidyAll>
* L<Perl::Tidy>
