Title: There is No Try
Topic: Try::Tiny

=for :html
<div class="bestof">
2020 has been time consuming - a global pandemic, giant fires, horrific floods
and political unrest - which has left us little time for side projects.
This year we're looking back to happier times into the 20+ year archive with the
Best of the Perl Advent Calendar.
</div>

=head1 C<eval> Stinks

This is a pretty common pattern of code:

  #!perl
  my $result = eval { $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff };

  if ($@) {
    $self->set_last_error( "couldn't get stuff computed: $@" );
    return undef;
  } 

  return $result;

In other words, try to call some method on C<$self>'s helper object.  If it
fails, set an error and return C<undef>.  Otherwise, return the result we got.
You can find code like this all over the place, and unfortunately, it's got
problems.

The most horrible, and possibly well known, is that C<$@> being set isn't the
right way to check for C<eval> failing.  (Let's not worry about the
pathological case of someone throwing a false exception object.  That's just
sick.)

The real reason is that until recently, C<$@> could get easily clobbered by
action at a distance.  For example, look at the code again:

  #!perl
  my $result = eval { $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff };

It's calling C<computation_helper> which might look like this:

  #!perl
  sub computation_helper {
    my ($self) = @_;
    return Computation::Helper->new( helper_for => $self );
  }

It sets up some helper object that we can throw away when we're done.  We call
its C<compute_stuff> method, which dies.  At this point, C<eval> starts to
return false, with C<$@> set to that exception message.  Unfortunately, little
known to us, this code exists:

  #!perl
  package Computation::Helper;
  sub DESTROY {
    my ($self) = @_;
    eval { ... };
  }

...and it's going to clobber our C<$@> when the helper object gets destroyed –
and that's going to happen once the C<eval> block is done and the helper object
is no longer referenced by anything.  Instead of testing for C<$@>, we should
test for a false return from C<eval>:

  #!perl
  my $result = eval { $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff };

  if (! $result) {
    # we died! set last_error, etc.
  }

This isn't any good, either, though.  What if C<compute_stuff> can actually
return false, or more specifically the empty string?  We need to rewrite to
force C<eval>'s hand:

  #!perl
  my $result;
  my $ok = eval { $result = $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff; 1 };

  if (! $ok) {
    # we died! set last_error, etc.
  }

Now we know that C<eval> will always return C<1> unless it fails.  This means
we need to move the assignment to C<$result> inside the eval, and we need to
move the declaration to an new, earlier statement.

Finally, to keep our eval from clobbering anybody else's C<$@> in the future,
we need to localize.  In the end, our code ends up as:

  #!perl
  my $result;
  my $ok = do {
    local $@;
    eval { $result = $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff; 1 };
  };

  if (! $ok) {
    my $error = $@ eq '' ? 'unknown error' : "$@";
    $self->set_last_error( "couldn't get stuff computed: $error" );
    return undef;
  } 

  return $result;

Even if not a I<huge> increase in the code needed for the operation, it's a
bunch of magic to remember every time.  If you don't do this sort of thing,
though, you've got a big opening for horrible error-handling problems.

=head1 Two Solutions

It's worth noting that these problems are greatly lessened in perl 5.14, where
our hypothetical C<DESTROY> method would not have clobbered the outer C<$@>.
If you can use 5.14, you should, and this is one very good reason.

That still leaves a bunch of boilerplate, though.  This is why L<Try::Tiny>
has become so popular.  Unlike many of the other, more feature-rich try/catch
systems on the CPAN, Try::Tiny focuses on doing just the minimum needed to
avoid the boilerplate above.  For example, we'd write the code above as:

  #!perl
  use Try::Tiny;

  return try {
    $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff;
  } catch {
    my $error = $_ eq '' ? 'unknown error' : "$_";
    $self->set_last_error( "couldn't get stuff computed: $error" );
    return undef;
  };

It encapsulates the localization of the error variable and the addition of the
constant true value to check for.  The C<catch> block is only entered if the
C<try> block died, and the exception thrown is in C<$_> (and C<$_[0]>).
Simple!

=head1 Extra Sugar

Try::Tiny also provides one more helper:  C<finally>.  It lets you provide a
block (or many blocks) of code to be run after the C<try> and C<catch>, no
matter whether there was an error:

  #!perl
  use Try::Tiny;

  my $start = Time::HiRes::time;

  return try {
    $self->computation_helper->compute_stuff;
  } catch {
    my $error = $_ eq '' ? 'unknown error' : "$_";
    $self->set_last_error( "couldn't get stuff computed: $error" );
    return undef;
  } finally {
    my $failed = @_;
    my $end  = Time::HiRes::time;
    warn sprintf "took %f seconds to %s",
      $end - $start,
      $failed ? 'fail' : 'succeed';
  };

You can tell whether the C<try> block failed by whether there are any elements
in C<@_>.  Even if somehow the contents of C<$@> couldn't be preserved, you'll
find an undef in the argument list if the try failed.  Otherwise, it will be
empty.  You can supply as many try blocks as you want.

Try::Tiny doesn't do much, but it nicely packages up a pattern that's important
to use and really boring to type out every time.  Not only does it save you
from having to remember the details each time, but it gives you an interface
that's easier to write and skim, too.  Use it!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Try::Tiny>
