Title: Synchronous Operations are So Outdated
Topic: AnyEvent
Author: Sawyer X <xsawyerx@cpan.org>

=head1 Understanding asynchronous events

The best way to explain why synchronous code can sometimes be daunting
is to use an example from Real Life™. A single day in our lives can contain
plenty of actions that make us cringe and growl. Take, for instance, trying to
make a meal.

Imagine you're cooking. You wouldn't wait for the water to boil before you
prepared the potatoes. Nor would you wait for the potatoes to be done before
you started working on the salad.

Asynchronous programming means having multiple events happen at
the same time. It allows you to get more things done while you're waiting for
other things to happen.

The fundamental element of asynchronous programming is the callback, so let's
review that first, and then take a look at some examples of async in code-land.

We will be using L<AnyEvent> for this article, but the same principles exist
in all other async frameworks.

=head1 Introduction to callbacks

Since multiple events run at the same time, the application (much like the
spice) must flow.  To make this work, whenever we start one event we include
references to the code that should be run when it finishes or hits other
milestones.  Since the event then "knows" how to proceed on its own, it can
start up and work in the background while the rest of the program continues on
doing more things.

We're going to be using a technique that some are not familiar with:
B<callbacks>.  Just to get you up to speed, let me start by explaining
callbacks in a nutshell: callbacks are just references to subroutines.

These subroutines can be defined using names or they can be anonymous. We can
call those subroutines by their reference instead of their name.

  #!perl
  # callbacks to named subroutines
  sub func { ... }
  my $func_reference = \&func;
  $func_reference->(@arguments);

  # callbacks to anonymous subroutines
  my $func_reference = sub { ... };
  $func_reference->(@arguments);

If we use C<sub> to create a reference to a subroutine, we can pass the
callback as a parameter directly, without saving it first:

  #!perl
  sub some_cb_handler {
      my $callback = shift;
      $callback->("hello");
  }

  # We pass in the callback without ever giving it a name or making it
  # globally accessible.
  some_cb_handler( sub {
      my $greeting = shift;
      say "$greeting, world!";
  } );

=head1 Reading from input

You have an application that needs to read from a handle (which could be a
file descriptor, a socket, or even the standard input), but you don't know
when it will be ready to be read.

In a synchronous application, you'll be waiting for it to become available,
possibly calling C<sleep> in between. But these days, we're busy people, we
can't just be waiting by the phone. We have stuff to do!

  #!perl
  sub alert_action {
      my $action = shift;
      say "New action found: $action";
  }

  my $io_watcher = AnyEvent->io(
      fh   => $fh,
      poll => 'r',
      cb   => sub {
          # we can now read!
          my $input = <$fh>;
          if ( $input =~ /^New action: (\w+)/ ) {
              alert_action($1);
          }
      },
  );

  # continue to do something else

How does that work? By calling L<AnyEvent>'s C<io> method, you're creating a
new watcher that checks a file handle for new read events. If it has
something to read, it will call the code reference we provided. Both the checks
and the subroutine call will happen in the background.

Also, since we've given it all the information it needs (which file handle to
poll, what kind of events we want, and what to do in that case), it doesn't
need to hold us back. That way we can continue with some other code, and the
watcher will wait and run the background, without bothering us.

=head1 Keeping the watchers alive

There is a problem I haven't mentioned. That code is fine, except that once it
executes the additional code, the application will close, simply because it
reached the end of the file. We want to keep the application running, so our
watchers will continue to work. How do we do that? Condition variables!

Condition variables are variables that represent a condition waiting to come
true, like your cat waiting for you to get comfortable with a laptop.  When the
variable becomes true, the cat comes over and lies on your lap, disrupting your
work.

  #!perl
  my $done    = AnyEvent->condvar;
  my $watcher = AnyEvent->io(
      fh   => $fh,
      poll => 'r',
      cb   => sub {
          my $input = <$fh>;
          ...
          if ( $input =~ /^End of processing file/ ) {
              $done->send;
          }
      },
  );

  ...
  $done->recv;
  say "All done!";

This time we created a condition variable that is available to the watcher.
The watcher still dilligently continues its work. Only this time as soon as it
finds a line in the file indicating the end of it, it will call C<send> on the
condition variable, making the condition true, effectively saying "that's it,
we're done".

If someone has called C<recv> on the condition variable, it will wait until
something else in the background (like our watcher) will call C<send> and then
will continue running.

That means that the line "All done!" will only get written once our worker
finished reading the line.

Another ramification of the condition variable's behavior is that it is
possible to create an infinite loop by creating a condition variable, calling
C<recv>, and not having anything call C<send> on it. It looks exactly like
this:

  #!perl
  my $cv = AnyEvent->condvar;
  $cv->recv;

  # or in short
  AnyEvent->condvar->recv;

Since the application is now waiting for a condition variable to come true, it
will not terminate. Because nothing can call C<send> on this variable, it
basically means the application will stay up indefinitely. The most common
usage for this are daemons, which should always be running.

=head1 Timing your cooking

The last element in L<AnyEvent> that  we'll be looking at is the timer. Timers
are events (any kind of event) that gets run at some point in time. It can be
in a few minutes from now or at a specific hour. It can happen once or it can
repeat itself several times, or even forever.

  #!perl
  my $timer = AnyEvent->timer(
      after    => 3.5,
      interval => 5,
      cb       => sub {
          say "Ping? Pong!";
      },
  );

This defines a timer that will wait 3.5 seconds, and then call the subroutine
every 5 seconds. Fairly simple. Let's try a few timers.

  #!perl
  my @steps        = qw<Cutting Simmering Cooking Seasoning Serving>;
  my $current_step = 'Preparing';

  my $done = AnyEvent->condvar;
  my $t1   = AnyEvent->timer(
      interval => 60 * 7,
      cb       => sub {
          say "Current cooking state: $current_step";
      },
  );

  my $t2 = AnyEvent->timer(
      after    => 2,       # two seconds to wash hands before working!
      interval => 60 * 10, # assuming every action takes 10 minutes
      cb       => sub {
          $current_step = shift @steps or return $done->send;
          do_step($current_step);
      },
  );

  $done->recv;
  say "Dinner is served!";

What we have here isn't the best example for how to make a meal, but it
does give us an example showing multiple timers. The first timer (C<$t1>)
keeps alerting us every seven minutes about our progress. Meanwhile, our
second timer picks up an action to do every 10 minutes, and does it. Once no
more actions are available, it tells the condition variable that it's done.
It does this by simply returning out of the subroutine (so we don't call
C<do_step> again) and calling C<send> at the same time.

After we created our timers, we set up a C<recv> on a condition variable,
meaning "don't continue running the rest of the application until we are
notified that the timers finished their work". It will wait in that point in
time (without blocking the timers) until the C<send> is called. Then it will
continue and say dinner is finally served. Since it's the end of the
application, the timers will close and the application will end.

Here is the output we'll get from running the application:

  Current cooking state: Preparing
  (do_step() called with "Cutting")
  Current cooking state: Cutting
  (do_step() called with "Simmering")
  Current cooking state: Simmering
  Current cooking state: Simmering
  (do_step() called with "Cooking")
  Current cooking state: Cooking
  (do_step() called with "Seasoning")
  Current cooking state: Seasoning
  (do_step() called with "Serving")
  Current cooking state: Serving
  Current cooking state: Serving
  Dinner is served!

=head1 Condition variables with multiple calls

Sometimes the behavior of the condition variable's C<send> and C<recv> is
not flexible enough to handle instances in which you need to be able to wait
on multiple calls.

Suppose you have a calculation to do that depends on the result of multiple
database queries. Before the SQL experts jump at it, let's also suppose these
queries are made across different databases.

A database connection is in fact a network operation, which means it blocks.
This is an ideal example for async programming. You could initiate several
connections and queries concurrently instead of consequtively. Using condition
variables, you would probably try to open three condition variables, and then
waiting for each to come true. That won't work, since you can only call C<recv>
on one variable at a time.

Instead, condition variables can accept a C<begin> and C<end> call to signify
a multi-call request. Once there's been an C<end> call for each C<begin> call,
it will return to the C<recv> method.

  #!perl
  my $cv  = AnyEvent->condvar;
  my $sum = 0;
  foreach my $db (@dbs) {
      # beginning an event
      $cv->begin;

      $db->query( $query, sub {
          my $amount = shift;
          $sum += $amount;

          # finishing an event
          $cv->end;
      },
  }

  $cv->recv;
  say "All database queries finished.";

=head1 Bringing it all together

After we've gone over a few elements of AnyEvent, we can build a small useful
application. We'll add a few more elements such as L<AnyEvent::HTTP>,
L<Regexp::Common>, and L<File::Basename>.

Suppose we have a file that has contains a lot of links and we want to download
every image listed in it. These are two different actions: (1) reading the file
and (2) downloading the images. We will also have a timer that gives us the
progress every two seconds.

  #!perl
  use AnyEvent;
  use AnyEvent::HTTP;
  use Regexp::Common 'URI';
  use File::Basename 'basename';
  use autodie;

  my $counter   = 0;
  my $cv        = AnyEvent->condvar;
  my $fh        = open my $fh, '<', 'links.txt';
  my $fhwatcher = AnyEvent->io(
      fh   => $fh,
      poll => 'r',
      cb   => sub {
          my $line = <$fh>;

          # ignoring lines that aren't HTTP URIs
          $line =~ /^$RE{URI}{HTTP}$/ or return;

          # call an HTTP request
          $cv->begin;
          http_get $line, sub {
              my $body     = shift;
              my $filename = basename($line);

              syswrite $filename, $body ?
                  $counter++            :
                  or warn "Couldn't write to $filename: $!";

              $cv->end;
          };
      },
  );

  my $progress = AnyEvent->timer(
      after    => 2, # giving it two seconds before starting
      interval => 2, # report every two seconds
      cb       => sub {
          printf "[%s] Update: finished downloading $counter images.\n",
              scalar AnyEvent->now;
      },
  );

  $cv->recv;
  close $fh;
  say "Finished downloading all files";

Let's analyze what we've got here. We use some modules that you should
recognize. If you don't, you should check them out.

The next thing is opening a file handle. We then set up a watcher for some
I/O operations using L<AnyEvent>'s C<io> method. It needs the file handle we
are going to operate on, and the kind of operation we'll do (we pick C<r> for
reading) and a callback to run. This callback is the main thing that takes a
bit to understand.

Every time we read a line that has a URL, we call C<begin> on the condition
variable. We issue an HTTP request for that URL and once we finish fetching it
and saving it, we issue the corresponding C<end> call.  When all C<begin> calls
have C<end>ed, it will return to the C<recv> method, much like calling C<send>.

We also created a progress timer that announces, every two seconds, the number
of links we've sent. You'll notice it uses L<AnyEvent>'s C<now>, which is the
recommended way to call C<time> when running in an event loop.

The C<recv> call in the end will wait until all C<begin> calls will be closed.
Once we've worked on the entire file, it will print a nice message and the
application will end.

=head1 Just the beginning...

Once you get used to programming asynchronously, it's like having scissors:
you just run with it! B<Note:> Do not run with scissors. ✂ 🏃

Try out an event framework and see how much fun it is for yourself. Perl has
many to offer, such as L<AnyEvent>, L<POE>, L<IO::Async>, L<Reflex>,
L<IO::Lambda>, L<Coro>, and more.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<AnyEvent>
* L<POE>
* L<IO::Async>
* L<Reflex>
* L<IO::Lambda>
* L<Coro>
