Title: Atomic Gift Wrapping
Topic: File::AtomicWrite
Author: Yanick Champoux <yanick@cpan.org>

Gift wrapping. You rarely want to do it by the Christmas Tree because you
know, you just B<know> that just when you're in the middle of wrapping that
huge I<Dino-Rampage Total Combat Battlezone> box, one of your child processes
will innocently try to access the living room resources, see the half-ready
present, go totally ape-boinker, and make every single day till Christmas a
grueling hell.  So instead, you usually wrap the presents in some dark corner
of the house — usually the attic, the shed, or the secret room you built
specifically for that purpose. Then, when the pile o' prezzies is ready, you
carefully peek out in the hallway, make sure there is no living being in sight,
rush down the stairs holding the loot with every prehensible limb available,
and dump the whole thing under the tree. When the amazed kids ask how the
glittery boxes got there? Well… I<Magic>.

Atomic file writing? Exactly the same thing.

Most of the time, you can write files at your leisure, but sometimes you have
other programs that can access it at any time, and you don't want them to end
up bits and pieces. So you either begin to play with locking the file ("No one
enter the room until I'm done!") or you write the new file in a different
place, and when everything is ready, you do a quick switcheroo where you
replace the old copy with its new incarnation. There is still a window where
things can go wrong, but it's a minimal one.

Of course, the switcheroo is much easier (and funnier) to say than to do. That
is, unless you use L<File::AtomicWrite>, which takes care of all the nitty
gritty details for you. To wit:

  #!perl
  use File::AtomicWrite;

  my $present_list = File::AtomicWrite->new({ file => '/etc/wishlist' });

  my $fh = $present_list->fh;

  say {$fh} 'For Xmas, I want:';

  say {$fh} 'A pony';

  # snip 10,000 lines

  say {$fh} 'And a Rocket-Raptor Sky Armageddon action figure';

  $present_list->commit;

Or, alternatively:

  #!perl
  use File::AtomicWrite;

  File::AtomicWrite->write_file({
    file  => '/etc/wishlist',
    input => \$all_i_want,
  });

To accomodate different levels of paranoia, the module allows for several
options, including the directory in which the temporary file is written, the
template for the name of said temporary file, optional checksum of the data to
be written, the minimal size that data should be (wishlist under 50K?
IMPOSSIBLE!), and much, much more. But, and this is the good news, all the hard
stuff has been taken off your plate. Now all you need to do is to write to
the file (easy) or, in the real world equivalent, find the gift that needs to
be appended under the tree (… okay, maybe not that easy).

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<File::AtomicWrite>
