Title: Expanding Your CGI Parameters with CGI::Expand
Topic: CGI::Expand
Author: Adam M Dutko <adam@runbymany.com>

=head1 CGI and parameters

The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) restricts developers to structuring
parameters into C<name=value> pairs. For instance, let's say you have a page
F<(index.pl> — as shown in the "Full Code Example" section) that prints the
pairs of parameters passed through a GET or POST.

When you access the page through the GET method with the following Universal
Resource Identifier (URI) C<index.pl?skill=writing&language=perl> you see:

  #!vim yaml
  skill: writing
  language: perl

You get the same result if you POST the equivalent data, too.

The relevant code from F<index.pl> that performs these operations looks like:

  #!perl
  for my $param_name (param)
  {
    print "$param_name: ";
    my @param_values = param($param_name);
    print join(", ", @param_values), "<br />\n";
  }

As you can read in the code, the C<param> method provides the functionality
we're interested in discussing today. When called without a parameter, C<param>
or C<param()>, the method returns a list of parameter names. When accessed with
the name of a parameter, C<param("animal")>, the method returns the value of
the parameter.

Now, let's say you have a more complex example, like a preferences page for a
shopping site with a large list of options. You need to construct a list of
names for each element so that when you POST to the server for processing you
can identify which options were selected so you can test the parameters one by
one to determine which ones are populated, which ones aren't, and then parse
each value to determine if the input is valid and if it is set the proper
field, process the data and display a result.

Phew! Did you get all of that?

That is an awful lot of work to perform when you can quite easily set each name
attribute to a value that mimics the structure of your form and imparts an
intrinsic structure to the data sent through the POST. Why do the following:

	#!code
	skill_one=technology&skill_two=writing&language_one=perl&language_two=python&
	language_three=php&language_four=c&languages_five=java

when you can do the following:

	#!code
	skills.0=technology&skills.1=writing&languages.0=perl&languages.1=python&
	languages.2=php&languages.3=c&languages.4=java

O.K. You get the first example where I used a unique name for each value but
now I lost you with the second? Understandable, but first think about what I
did and try to map it to data structures found in Perl.

You see a hash. Good! You see a list. Great! With CGI::Expand you can use a
variety of structures to POST data. In this case I sent the following to the
server with the second example:

  #!perl
  {
     skills => ['technology', 'writing'],
     languages => ['perl', 'python', 'php', 'c', 'java']
  }

Now, can you see how useful such structures might be when used with complex
forms?  Great! Provided the module you are using implements a compatible
C<param> method like C<CGI> you can leverage C<CGI::Expand> to make your life
and that of the maintenance developers behind you, much easier. In the
following sections you can learn about how C<CGI::Expand> does the heavy
lifting for you, how you can configure C<CGI::Expand> to suit your needs and
about some helper methods provided by the module that might be useful to you in
other projects.

=head1 CGI::Expand

The methods provided by C<CGI::Expand> include C<expand_cgi>, C<expand_hash>
and C<collapse_hash>. The first method provides the core functionality of the
module, to pack the The expand and collapse utility methods provide the
developer with the ability to build a hashref from a parameter string and
collapse a hashref into a parameter string accordingly.

=head2 C<expand_cgi()>

This method takes a CGI object and returns a hashref for the expanded data
structure.  This becomes important when you build structure into your
parameters like in the following example:

  #!perl
  $parameters = 'skill.0=technology&skill.1=writing&language.0=perl'
              . '&language.1=python &language.2=php&language.3=c'
              . '&language.4=java';

  # expanded with

  $hash = expand_cgi( CGI->new($parameters) );

  # expands to

  $hash = {
     skill => ['technology', 'writing'],
     language => ['perl', 'python', 'php', 'c', 'java']
  }

The above is a trivial example. More complex examples are given on the CPAN
page for
C<CGI::Expand> as listed in the references section.

=head2 C<expand_hash()>

The C<expand_hash()> method implements the logic used to expand the keys of the
parameter hash. The CPAN page for C<CGI::Expand> provides a great example:

  #!perl
  $args = expand_hash({ 'a.b.1' => [1,2] });

  # where the value of $args is

  { a => { b => [undef, [1,2] ] } }

=head2 C<collapse_hash()>

The C<collapse_hash()> method implements the logic used to collapse the hashref
into the parameter string. Again, the CPAN page for C<CGI::Expand> provides a
great example:

  #!perl
  $flat = collapse_hash({ a => { b => [undef, [1,2] ] } });

  # where the value of $flat is

  { 'a.b.1.0' => 1, 'a.b.1.1' => 2 }

=head1 Configuring CGI::Expand

In addition to being able to subclass the C<expand_cgi> method to change the
default logic used to expand the parameter string, the behavior of the methods
provided by C<CGI::Expand> can also be influenced by adjusting two class
attributes, C<max_array> and C<separator> and/or two helper functions,
C<split_name()> and C<join_name()>.

The first of the two class attributes, C<max_array>, sets the size limit for
arrays used in the hashref, which by default is set to 100. The second
attribute, C<separator>, sets the character used to separate the packed
parameter string, which by default is a period. Each of these options need to
be overridden to change the default behavior of the C<expand_cgi> method.

The first of the two helper functions, C<split_name(), implements the logic
used to parse the parameter string and split it into segments while the second
helper function, C<join_name()> implements the logic used to join the split
segments back into a parameter string.

=head1 Conclusion

C<CGI::Expand> can make your life much easier by giving you a way to structure
your parameters in a way you want while also giving you a way to embed meaning
into the structure. These two benefits should reduce the amount of code you
write which should reduce time to market and improve maintainability. Hopefully
this article provided you with a quick introduction to C<CGI::Expand>l If you
decide to use this module in your code you should probably read about the
C<EXCEPTIONS>, C<DEPRECATIONS> and C<LIMITATIONS> at the links provided in the
C<References> section. Good luck with your code! and Happy Holidays!

=head1 Full Code Example

  #!perl
  #!/usr/bin/perl

  use strict;
  use warnings;

  use CGI ':standard';

  my $form = '
      <p>Select your skill: </p>
      <select name="skill">
          <option name="technology">Technology</option>
          <option name="writing">Writing</option>
      </select>
      <select name="software">
          <option name="perl">Perl</option>
          <option name="python">Python</option>
          <option name="php">PHP</option>
          <option name="c">C</option>
          <option name="java">Java</option>
      </select>
      <input type="submit" value="SUBMIT" />
  ';

  my $query = CGI->new();
  print $query->header();
  print $query->start_html("Perl Advent 2012");
  print $query->startform(-method => "POST", -target => "#");

  print $form;

  print $query->endform();

  print "You submitted ... <br /><br />";
  print "METHOD: " . request_method() . "<br />";
  for my $param_name (param)
  {
      print "<strong>$param_name</strong> -> ";
      my @param_values = param($param_name);
      print join(", ", @param_values), "<br />\n";
  }

  print $query->end_html();

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<CGI::Expand>
