Title: Generate static web sites using your favorite Perl framework
Topic: Wallflower
Author: Philippe Bruhat (BooK) <book@cpan.org>

=head1 The best of two worlds 
=encoding utf8


=head2 Static web sites

Have you noticed the recent trend of static blogging?

The idea behind static blogging is to use a tool to I<generate> the
HTML pages that constitute the blog from a set of simple text files,
and to publish these generated pages using a basic web server.

Some would argue that a blog without comments is not really a blog.
And how do you comment without C<POST>? One way would be to delegate
the C<POST>ing to someone else (like L<Disqus|http://disqus.com/>).

Also, static web sites don't have to be frozen. Nothing prevents you
from generating the site content regularly (especially if it depends on
an external source) or from hooking it to your VCS repository, so that every
update to the source triggers a regeneration.

Going back to static web sites, here are a few reasons why
people like them:

=over 4

=item *

Speed:

It would be really hard to beat a webserver serving a static
file from disk.

=item  *

Security:

No user input means no SQL injection. If no code is run to produce the
response, then no bugs can interfere in the process.

Of course, you're still vulnerable to your webserver's own security issues
when it serves static files, but that should be a pretty limited set.

=item *

Simplicity:

A static web site is a bunch of files. You can commit them in a VCS and push
them to their final destination, or you can use FTP.  It's the easiest
deployment procedure ever.

=item *

Economy:

Generate once, request any time!

=back

Static blogging tools like L<Jekyll|http://jekyllrb.com/>,
L<Pelican|http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pelican>,
L<Middleman|http://middlemanapp.com/> keep popping up, and new ones are
invented almost daily.

(I have myself been using
L<ttree|http://template-toolkit.org/docs/tools/ttree.html> for years,
but writing code using L<http://template-toolkit.org/|Template Toolkit>'s
DSL can be limiting.)

The setup is always the same: take a bunch of files in I<some format>
(usually L<Markdown|http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/>,
L<reStructuredText|http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html> or
L<Textile|http://www.txstyle.org/>), plus some configuration, and run
the tool. The problem with that is always the same: the model fits
the original author's needs, and you have to follow I<their> rules.
Personalisation not included.

=head2 Web frameworks

Perl has plenty of awesome web frameworks, such
as L<Catalyst|http://www.catalystframework.org/>,
L<Dancer|http://www.perldancer.org/>, L<Mojolicious|http://mojolicio.us/>,
and many others, to let you write your web application the way
you want.  Each has its own set of advantages and disadvantages, but
that is not the point of this article.

The point is that using those to run a blog or the framework's
marketing^Whome page may seem wasteful, as there's
probably little need to regenerate a page for each request, no matter
if the content has changed or not.


=head2 Static web sites made with web frameworks

PSGI is an interface between web servers and applications written in
Perl. The Plack implementation of PSGI is supported by most Perl web
frameworks. It's also possible to write your own application (a PSGI
application is just a subroutine) and connect it to any supported web
server — and most web servers are supported.

After having tried to write my own static site generator, and having
failed at
making it as flexible as I would have liked (which in retrospect would
probably have made it a web framework in itself), it seemed wiser to
start building a site with one of those nice web frameworks and to use
Plack as my entry point to get the to the content.

L<wallflower> is a command-line
tool that takes a PSGI application, and uses Plack to access to the
content and save it to local files, ready to be uploaded to your
static web server.

After obtaining the coderef for your application, it repeatedly creates
the PSGI environment for the URL you want to process and runs your app on
it (using C<Plack::Util::run_app>), saving the response content to a local
file.  If the response content type is C<text/html> or C<text/css>,
it will automatically look for embedded links and add them to its queue,
thus enabling auto-discovery of the entire web site.

The point of L<Wallflower> is to let you write any static website using
all the power of your favorite web framework. It also follows links
inside your Plack application, so if your site is properly organized,
you only need to point it to C</>.


=head2 Blogging statically with your favorite framework

The obvious example for this would be to write a blog. I'll use Dancer,
because it's the only web framework I know, but keep in mind that this
will work with any PSGI-compliant framework. You could actually write
your own PSGI application, if no existing framework suited you.

Since our target is a I<static> web site, the main thing to keep in mind
is that the target web server will determine the content type by looking
at the extension, each all of our URLs B<must> have an extension.

The sources for our basic blog will be a set of text files in the
F<public/> subdirectory, with the content written in Markdown. URL will
simply be mapped to those files.

So, we start by writing a route to handle all URL ending with F<.html>:

  #!perl
  package ShyBlog;
  use Dancer ':syntax';
  use Text::Markdown;
  use Path::Class qw( file );

  my $m = Text::Markdown->new;

  get qr{/(.*)\.html} => sub {
      my ($file) = splat;
      my $text = file( setting('public') => "$file.txt" )->slurp;
      template 'blog', { content => $m->markdown($text) };
  };

  1;

Since we put our blog entries in the F<public/> directory, Dancer
will automatically serve the source when we end the URL in F<.txt>!
And we didn't even need to write a route for that!

Now, we want to get any further than a single blog post, to showing a
main page with the latest post, some side bars on every page pointing to
the archives by month, and maybe a JSON file with all our tags for making
a nice tag cloud in JavaScript, we have a bit of a problem: we need to
know about all our blog's posts when generating any individual one.

Remember that our PSGI application is ultimately a subroutine
that will be called repeatedly by wallflower, so we just have to make
the needed data available to the subroutine by building the list of all
posts, once and for all, during the initialisation phase of the application.

A simple call to L<File::Find> will help us generate the list of all posts,
from which we can create a data structure.  In this example it's an array:

  #!perl
  use File::Find;
  use Path::Class;

  my @entries;

  find(
      sub {

          # we only care about blog entries
          return if !/\.txt$/;

          # get a Path::Class::File for it
          my $file = file($File::Find::name);
          my $fh   = $file->openr;

          # parse a simple header using the kite secret operator
          chomp( my ( $title, $date, $tags ) = ( ~~<$fh>, ~~<$fh>, ~~<$fh> ) );

          # update the structure will all relevant information
          my $source = substr( $File::Find::name, length( setting('public') ) );
          ( my $url = $source ) =~ s/\.txt$/.html;

          push @entries, {
              url    => '/' .
              title  => $title,
              date   => $date,
              tags   => [ split /\s*,\s*/, $tags ],
              source => "/$year/$month/$_.txt",
          };
      },
      setting( 'public' )
  );

Actually, for simplicity, and integration with the framework, it would
make sense to create a temporary SQLite database, with a few tables for
blog entries meta-information, tags, etc.  The code in the templates and some
special routes (like the main page) can then use that database to fetch all the
information they need.

Generating the website is now simply a matter of running:

    $ wallflower -a bin/app.pl -d /path/to/the/output/

F<wallflower> will start browsing the application from C</> and will follow
all links (from HTML and CSS files) to generate your site content.

You can then copy the content of F<output/> to the proper location on
the target web server, and you're done!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<App::Wallflower>
* L<wallflower>
* L<PSGI>
* L<Dancer>
* L<< ~~<>|perlsecret/Kite >>

