Title: Fixing the regexep code block facility
Topic: (?{})
Author: Dave Mitchell <davem@iabyn.com>

The C</(?{})/> code-execution facility was added to regular expressions
back in 1998, in the 5.005 release. Since then it's been sitting there,
marked experimental, until in 2012, the implementation was completely
re-written for the 5.17.1 release.

The way it originally worked was that during regex compilation, if an
opening C<(?{> was seen, the balancing C<}> was found, and the text
between the braces was passed to perl's internal eval mechanism. But after
compiling the code, the execution was skipped, and instead the optree and
pad of the compiled eval were saved and attached to the regexp object.
Later when the regexp was being executed, the current pad would be set to
the saved pad, and the ops in the optree called.

So, what's wrong with that?

Well, everything really.

First, at the most trivial level, the code isn't properly parsed, so
something like C</(?{ $x = '{' })/> is an error, due the simplistic
counting of balancing braces. This is in contrast to something like
C<"foo$hash{ $x ? '{' : '[' }bar">, where the expression for the hash
index doesn't require balanced braces.

So the first change was to integrate the parsing of the code blocks with
the parsing of the surrounding Perl code: at least for literal regexes.

The second big issue was that by just saving the pad and resurrecting it
from time to time, lexicals at best did the wrong thing, and at worst
caused segfaults. In particular, the behaviour of closures didn't match
reasonable expectations. For example, this code:

  #!perl
  for my $i (0..2) {
      push @r, qr/^(??{$i})$/;
  }
  print "ok 0\n" if "0" =~ $r[0];
  print "ok 1\n" if "1" =~ $r[1];
  print "ok 2\n" if "2" =~ $r[2];

prints out three ok's now, but formerly printed nothing. It works because
in terms of pads, closures, etc, these:

  #!perl
  /A(?{B})C/;
  $r = qr/A(?{B})C/;

(where B is a block of code) are now parsed (in terms of lexicals) roughly
as:

  #!perl
  /A/ && do {B} && /C/;
  $r = sub { /A/ && do {B} && /C/ };

That is, in the first line, the code block shares the same pad as the
surrounding code, while in the second example it uses the pad of a hidden
anonymous sub, which is cloned anew on each call to C<qr//>. This makes it
all Just Do the Right Thing.

However, Perl also supports patterns that are determined at run-time, or
which contain a mixture of compile- and run-time patterns, such as

  #!perl
  my $pat = 'C(?{D})';
  use re 'eval;
  /A(?{B})-$pat/;

Formerly, as the run-time pattern was being assembled, any bits of literal
code (such as the C<B> above) would be recompiled, destroying any closure
information. Now, such code snippets are preserved, and only the non-literal
bits are compiled. Similarly where regexp objects are included within a
larger pattern:

  #!perl
  my $re = qr/C(?{D})/;
  use re 'eval;
  /A(??{B})-$re/;

Although the text of the C<$re> pattern is interpolated and recompiled,
any code blocks within C<$re> are I<not> recompiled.

Finally, because pads are handled properly now, things don't go awry
during recursion:

  #!perl
  sub recurse {
      my ($n) = @_;
      return if $n > 2;
      print "ok\n" if "A$n" =~ /^A(??{$n})$/;
      recurse($n+1);
  }
  recurse(0);

There were lots of other subtleties involved, but those are the ones I can
think of off the top my head.
