Title: Santa Has Dependencies Too
Topic: Pinto
Author: Jeffrey Ryan Thalhammer <jeff@imaginative-software.com>

In the old days, Santa's elves would build every toy from scratch, but
now he outsources most of the parts for the toys.  Naturally, he has
created a sophisticated supply-chain management system to ensure that
each toy is consistently built from the same parts.

The same is true for software development.  These days, our
applications depend on lots of frameworks and libraries.  So we also
need to manage the supply of those dependencies to ensure that every
build has the same "parts".

L<Pinto> helps you manage your supply of dependencies by creating a
custom repository of Perl modules.  The repository is fully compatible
with CPAN installers (e.g. C<cpan>, C<cpanm>, C<cpanp>).  But unlike
the public CPAN, the modules in your Pinto repository only change when
you want to change them.  So you'll get the exact same result each and
every time you build.

The C<pinto> command line utility does all the work of creating the
repository, and provides some helpful tools for managing change as
your dependencies evolve over time.  Let's take a look at some of the
things you can do...

First, let's create a repository.  All you need is a directory where
the repository will live (we'll use F<~/my_repo> here) and the name of
the stack (we'll use C<prod> here).  A stack is just a named subset of
modules in your repository (more on that later).  Here's what the
command would look like:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo init --stack=prod

Suppose we want to use L<Catalyst> for a new application.  So let's
get it from the CPAN and put it in our Pinto repository.  This command
will put the latest (at this moment) version of Catalyst and all of
its dependencies into the Pinto repository:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo pull Catalyst

To install Catalyst, we just point C<cpanm> (or C<cpan> or C<cpanp>)
at the stack inside the repository.  Every time we do this, we'll get
exactly the same version of Catalyst and its dependencies, even if
newer versions have been released to the public CPAN:

  $ cpanm --mirror=file:///home/jeff/my_repo/prod --mirror-only Catalyst

From time to time, Santa decides to upgrade the parts used to build a
toy, or even switch to a new parts supplier entirely.  To ensure
quality, Santa always sets up a separate assembly line for the elves
to test the new parts before committing them to mass production.

With Pinto, you can do the same thing.  Suppose that Catalyst 4.0 is
released to the CPAN and we want to try upgrading our application,
which now has several other dependencies of its own.  We can make an
experimental duplicate of those dependencies by copying the stack like
this:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo copy prod catalyst-upgrade

Any changes we make to the "catalyst-upgrade" stack are completely
separate from the "prod" stack.  So we can now go ahead and upgrade
Catalyst (and whatever new modules it may require) like this:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo pull --stack=catalyst-upgrade Catalyst~4.0

To test our upgraded application dependencies, we just make a new
build by pointing cpanm at the "catalyst-upgrade" stack inside the
repository:

  $ cpanm --mirror=file:///home/jeff/my_repo/catalyst-upgrade --mirror-only Catalyst

If our application (and all of its dependencies) build cleanly then we
can just merge two stacks together and throw away the experimental
stack:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo merge catalyst-upgrade prod
  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo delete catalyst-upgrade

Occasionally, Santa's elves find that a new version of a part is
flawed or just not compatible with current their line of toys.  Since
the workshop is pretty big, it can be hard to ensure that every elf
foreman doesn't mistakenly order the new (flawed) part for his
assembly line.  So Santa keeps a real-time blacklist of all the part
numbers that are not allowed in the workshop.

This happens all the time in software development, so Pinto allows you
to "pin" the modules in your repository, which prevents them from
being upgraded.  Suppose we already have Plack 2.0 in our Pinto
repository and we learn that Plack 3.0 is not compatible with our
application.  So we can pin Plack to let everyone know that it can't
be upgraded yet:

  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo pin Plack

If anyone tries to upgrade Plack directly or to satisfy the
prerequisites for some other module, then Pinto will refuse to comply.
Once you've resolved the problem, then you can unpin Plack and upgrade
it as needed.

Keeping lists of all the naughty and nice children is huge task, so
Santa has become very good at record keeping.  He also keeps excellent
records of everything that happens in the workshop.  This helps him to
identify the critical links in his supply chain or reward deserving
elves.

Pinto keeps records too, so you can see what's in the repository right
now and how it has changed over time.  Here are some of the things you
can do:

  # Show all the modules in the stack right now:
  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo list

  # Show who's responsible for the current modules in the stack:
  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo blame

  # Show how and why the stack has changed over time:
  $ pinto -r ~/my_repo log --detailed

As you can imagine, Santa Claus has pretty much perfected the science
of supply-chain management.  So when it comes to managing our supply
of module dependencies, we software developers could probably learn a
lot from him.  Perhaps Pinto should have been called "Donner" or
"Vixen".

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item Pinto on CPAN

L<https://metacpan.org/module/Pinto>

=item Pinto::Manual on CPAN

L<https://metacpan.org/module/Pinto::Manual>

=item Pinto presentation at YAPC

L<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaBBVZFhJUk>

=back

=cut

