Title: Which Library Broke?
Topic: Dist::Zilla::Plugin::ReportVersions::Tiny

=encoding utf8

The CPAN is built on a few key principles that make it such a success.  One of
them is that you don't have to write every part of the library you want to
write.  You can declare that it depends on some other preexisting library, and
that library will be found and installed.  Still, there's sometimes a cultural
pressure to require as few prerequisites as to require as old a version as
possible.  In other words, it's often preferable to avoid making anybody
install or upgrade anything.  On the other hand, it's also frowned upon to put
an upper limit on versions.  (Actually, it's technically difficult to specify a
bounded range, so those frowns are redundant and maybe I just made them up.)

Keeping track of what versions you I<actually need>, then, often works like
this:

=for :list
1. declare that you need version 0
2. wait for somebody to tell you things aren't working
3. figure out what prerequisite library versions are unusual
4. ask the user to upgrade or downgrade libraries until it works
5. adjust the listed prequisites

The problem here is #3.  It's a pain for the reporting user to go compile his
installed versions, and it's a pain to do it yourself for comparison.  On the
bright side, the CPAN Testers, who can never be sufficiently thanked for their
contributions to the CPAN, usually submit reports that include all the data
needed here.  You can look at L<almost any random
report|http://cpantesters.org/cpan/report/05bc2cdc-4481-11e1-9d6f-f6dbfa7543f5>
and find the prerequisites listed, both as they were requested and as they were
found.  That's great, if you're getting reports from CPAN smoke bots.  It
doesn't cover everybody else.

For everybody else, the trick is to write a little program that prints out a
table like the one in the tester's report:  for each prereq, it shows the
requested and found version of the module.  L<A program to do
that|http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/DOLMEN/Dist-Zilla-Plugin-ReportVersions-Tiny-1.08/t/000-report-versions-tiny.t>
is simple, but sort of a tedious pain to write.  As with almost anything useful
but boring, there's a L<Dist::Zilla> plugin to do it for you.

Actually, there are several.

L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::ReportVersions::Tiny> spits out a
F<000-report-versions-tiny.t> file like the one linked to above.  One of the
best things about that plugin is that it generates a test program with no extra
prerequisites.  It produces a simple, useful program that you can bundle along
with your distribution, and whose output will be included, by default, with any
test run, and there's no "cost" in more prereqs for the installing user.

L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::Test::ReportPrereqs> does much the same job, but lets
you tweak the list a bit to add other libraries you know you care about that
aren't otherwise in your module list — but it doesn't include the requested
version in its output, and only runs if the C<AUTOMATED_TESTING> environment
variable is set.

Even if the reporting user isn't sending a "real" CPAN Testers report, it's
easy to get the table you need.  Just ask the user to run:

  $ perl -Mblib t/000-report-versions-tiny.t | nopaste

(Everybody has L<nopaste|http://perladvent.org/2011/2011-12-14.html> installed,
right?)

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::ReportVersions::Tiny>
* L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::Test::ReportPrereqs>
