Title: So long until next year!
Topic: Perl Advent 2012
Author: Ricardo Signes <rjbs@cpan.org>

The Advent calendar has ended.  It ended yesterday, so behind this door you're
not finding a rich, chocolately article about Perl, but instead a bland note
from the editor.  Sorry!

As always, the Perl Advent Calendar was a group effort, and I'd like to thank
everyone who contributed this year: Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt, Breno G. de
Oliveira, Chris Prather, Dave Mitchell, David Golden, Jeffrey Ryan Thalhammer,
Jesse Luehrs, Jonathan Swartz, Karen Etheridge, Mark Fowler, Philippe Bruhat
(BooK), Rafaël Garcia-Suarez, Sawyer X, Shawn M Moore, Toby Inkster, and Yanick
Champoux.

If you'd like to contribute an article for next year, you've got just about 365
days to do it!  This year — for the first time in years, if not ever — we had
more submissions than we could publish, so we might already have fewer than 24
slots open for 2013.  Wow!

If you want to help with the site or other things in the meantime, you can
<s>L<join our mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent></a></s> L<check the
perl-advent/Perl-Advent GitHub repo|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent/> where
we'll be talking about work that needs to get done on things like the FAQ, the
site generator, and all that sort of thing.  You can find the L<site's contents
on GitHub|https://github.com/perl-advent/Perl-Advent>, which I<should> contain the
2012 articles by the time you see this.  It's not exactly how it should be, but
it's there.

More importantly, you can find L<our wish list for fixes and
features|https://github.com/perl-advent/Perl-Advent/issues>.  Help with these and you
will earn fame forever (at least in the git logs)!

So until I'm back at Christmas 2013 – if I don't come to my senses and quit
this job – have a merry Christmas and an excellent new year!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<the perl-advent/Perl-Advent GitHub repo|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent/>
* L<the someday-to-be-rewritten FAQ|http://www.perladvent.org/FAQ.html>
* L<the mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent> (historical archive)
