Author: lichtkind@cpan.org
Title: At the Present Factory
Topic: charts, automation

=encoding utf8

=head1 At the Present Factory

Father Christmas is very old-school and so is his Perl code. There are no
towering software engineering marvels - just a bunch of wonderful scripts:
small, meticulously written, very readable and changeable.
And because there are so well organized, his system scales up to billions 
cheering children.

Reporting about such high volume of numbers has to be graphical - charts are needed.
They are getting mass produced by scripts that convert one dataset into one chart
of a particular layout and design by a call like:

=begin code

    perl script.pl data.tsv > chart.png

=end code

This approach allows maximal flexibility since source and target names are set 
from the outside and the scripts doesn't has to be adapted, even if the data 
comes from a database or a web scraper. But how to write such a converter script?

=head2 Establishing the Pipe

Basic examples can be found under L<Chart::Manual::Types>. But the code there
only uses inline data added by the C<add_dataset> method. In our case we 
have to use C<add_datafile>, which accepts file names or handles and loads
an entire table of space or tab separated values (empty rows and perl style comments ignored).
Here a short example with only three data rows:

=begin code

    Peter Paul Mary
    30    40   80 
    80    60   30 
    50    30   60 

=end code

You can produce such files with L<Text::CSV> by setting the porperty C<sep_char>
to C<' '> (I<0x20>) or C<"\t"> (I<0x09>). Or you update to Chart 2.403.9
or later and use pure CSV.

The names of the first row are of course X-axis-labels, but C<Chart> takes
care of that automatically and recognizes the following three rows as 
dataset0 .. dataset2. So let's look at the entire code:

=begin perl

    use Chart::Lines;

    my $file = shift;
    my $g = Chart::Lines->new( 600, 600 );
    $g->add_datafile( $file );

    $g->set(
        title          => 'Latest Numbers !',
        include_zero   => 'true',
        y_grid_lines   => 'true',
        precision      => 0,
        colors => {
            y_grid_lines => 'gray60',
            misc         => 'gray55',
            text         => 'gray55',
            x_label      => 'gray40',
            y_label      => 'gray40',
            title        => 'gray20',
        },
    );

    binmode STDOUT;
    print STDOUT $g->scalar_png;

=end perl

The last two code lines put the image binary into the command line, so after

=begin perl

    perl ./script.pl data.tsv > chart.png

=end perl

.. we get the chart in an image file of our choosing.

=head2 Data Set Manipulation

To take full advantage of this setup, our script should automatically adapt to
different data set sizes. For that we have to get hold of the data, transform 
as needed and put it back in. It is simply a referrence to an I<array of arrays>.

=begin perl

    ...
    $g->add_datafile( $file );
    my $data = $g->get_data;
    $g->clear_data;
    ...
    # data transform
    ...
    $g->add_dataset( $_ ) for @$data;
    ...
    $g->set(
    ...

=end perl

This for instance would allow us to create color gradients or wheels
of complementary colors of needed size matching the size of the dataset.
How this works I already showed in a previous calendar leaf.
But to give another practical example - wouldn't it be nice to have 
data tables like:

=begin code

    o     Peter Paul Mary
    2020  30    40   80 
    2021  80    60   30 
    2020  50    30   60 

=end code

The I<o> symbol or any other placeholder is important because C<Chart> gets 
unhappy quickly when rows are of unequal length - even we pull out the first 
column before drawing. With this little preprocessing the first column
of our data table is now appearing in the legend of the chart.

=begin perl

    ...
    $g->add_datafile( $file );
    my $data = $g->get_data;
    $g->clear_data;
    my @label = map {shift @$_ } @$data;
    shift @label;
    $g->add_dataset( $_ ) for @$data;
    $g->set(
        legend_labels => \@label,
    ...

=end perl

Voilà, our chart factory is humming away peacefully.

=head2 Conclusion

Little scripts can produce piles of charts that are well labeled and
and designer-colored, even if the incoming data sets have various sizes.
Check all example code and images L<here|https://github.com/lichtkind/Chart/tree/main/dev/example/advent>.

=cut

