Author: Csaba Simándi <x1m4nd1@gmail.com>
Title: Create Your Excel using Perl!
Topic: Excel::Writer::XLSX

=encoding utf8

=head1 Create Your Excel using Perl!

=head2 Intro

A long-long time ago, during the Advent of 2001, there was an article about manipulating Excel spreadsheets using Perl, L<Spreadsheet::WriteExcel|https://perladvent.org/2001/14th/>.
It's been a while now, so Santa decided to ask the Wise Old Elf to write another article about creating Excel files using Perl. 

There were only 3 days until Advent, with lots of articles missing, so the Wise Old Elf immediately delegated this task to Wunorse Openslae, and he chose wisely - as always. Wunorse was a master of managing Excel files and started to work on that article immediately.

=head2 Preface

Some historical background: The older module L<Spreadsheet::WriteExcel|https://metacpan.org/pod/Spreadsheet::WriteExcel> is for creating Excel files compatible with Excel 97, 2000, 2002, 2003 and 2007, mainly with C<.xls> extension. It is mostly compatible with Excel::Writer::XLSX, so L<migrating to the newer version|https://metacpan.org/pod/Spreadsheet::WriteExcel#Migrating-to-Excel::Writer::XLSX> should be as easy as Christmas pie. However such a migration is more like a heavy Christmas pudding loaded with goodness and lots of issues might arise during the process.

You can use C<Spreasheet::ParseExcel> for reading the older Excel files having C<.xls> extension, on the other hand You should use C<Spreadsheet::ParseXLSX> or C<Spreadsheet::XLSX> to open and manipulate existing Excel files. This article deals with creating Excel files in C<.xlsx> format.

=head2 Basics

First things first: we need to import the module, initialize an C<.xlsx> file, add some worksheets, input some data on them and finally close the file, as we would do with a usual filehandle.
This looks a bit different, though:

=begin code

	use Excel::Writer::XLSX;

	#Create excel file               
	my $merry = Excel::Writer::XLSX->new( 'xmas.xlsx' );
	#create the workbooks
	my $xmas = $merry->add_worksheet('Merry');
	my $baking_sheet = $merry->add_worksheet('Xmas');
	my $stats = $merry->add_worksheet('Everybody!');
	$xmas->write( 'A1', 'Merry Christmas!' );
	$merry->close();

=end code

I skipped to display the usual stuff from the beginning of the script, everyone should know by heart: C<use strict; use warnings;>, etc. 
This will be the skeleton or the Christmas themed frame of our script.
We can put everything else in between, depending on Santa's needs, a list of Christmas cookies from around Europe in hash format is a good example, including some stats.

=head2 Formatting

To add some format to your cells, use the C<add_format()> method. You can either just call it on Your C<$workbook> without parameters or pass a hash of formatting properties to it.
The rest depends on your choice from the two options. It is more convenient - in my opinion - to create a format object with a hash, rather than calling the formatting methods afterwards.
But the option is there to call the specific format methods for as You need them. I will demonstrate both ways in the examples.

=begin code
		
	#This will create a christmas colored landscape with snow in the background represented as dots.
	my %props = ( color => 'red',
		      size => '20',
		      bg_color => 'green',
		      pattern => 18,
		      align => 'center',
		     );
		     
	my $format = $workbook->add_format( %props );
	#write welcome text with formatting to top left cell
	$xmas->write( 'A1', 'Merry Christmas!', $format);
	#Set the column width.
	$xmas->set_column('A:A', 30);

=end code

You will need to pass the format object to Your write method as a parameter:

=begin code

	$merry->write( 'A1', 'Merry Christmas!', $format );

=end code

You might notice the C<set_column()> method,  this takes the column 'coordinates' as a parameter and a number which is the actual width.
Let's add some more format objects for later.

=begin code

	my $format2 = $merry->add_format();

	#Setting format using formatting methods, red and bold text, green background, center alignment, green background and dotted borders (for the snowflakes)

	$format2->set_color( 'red' );
	$format2->set_bold();
	$format2->set_size( 12 );
	$format2->set_bg_color( 'green' );
	$format2->set_align('center');
	$format2->set_border( 4 );

	#Just some snowflakes as border
	my $format3 = $merry->add_format( border => 4,);

=end code

=head2 Writing data into cells

There are two ways to do that: You can use either the row-column notation or the A1 notation as described in L<Cell notation|https://metacpan.org/pod/Excel::Writer::XLSX#Cell-notation>.
First of all we need some data so let's compose our cookies list.
We will use a hash of array refs to do this:

=begin code

	my $cookies = { 
		      Hungary => [ 'bejgli', 'hólabda' ],
		      Scandinavia => [ 'Pepparkakor', 'Ruiskakut', 'Lussekatter', 'Krumkake' ],
		      Netherlands => [ 'Spekulaas', 'Kerstkranjes' ],
		      Germany => [ 'Lebkuchen', 'Stollen' ],
		      Switzerland => [ 'Basler Läckerli', 'Brunsli' ],
		      Italy => [ 'Panettone', 'Pignoli', 'Cannoli' ],
		      Spain => [ 'Polvorones', 'Mantecados', 'Turrón' ],
		      Greece => [ 'Melomakarona' ],
		      };
		      
	#Sort the countries alphabetically
	my @countries = sort keys %$cookies;

	#Add the cookies to the baking sheet, one country per column.
	$baking_sheet->set_column( 0, scalar keys %$cookies, 15 );
	$baking_sheet->write( 'A1', \@countries, $format2 );

	my $i = 0;
	for ( sort keys %$cookies ) {
	  #Place Your cookies to the baking sheet
	  $baking_sheet->write( 1, $i, [ $cookies->{$_} ], $format3 );
	  $i++;
	}

	#write some statistics about how many types of cookies we have per country
	$stats->write( 'A1', [ \@countries ], $format2 );

	#Reset the counter
	$i = 0;
	#count how many cookies we have country wise.
	for ( sort keys %$cookies ) {
	  #Place Your cookies to the baking sheet
	  $stats->write( $i, 1, scalar @{$cookies->{$_}} , $format3 );
	  $i++;
	}
        
=end code

Many things are happening here.

First we get a list of countries sorted alphabetically.
Second we are writing those countries into the first row, alongside some formats, defined above.
Then comes the first usage of C<write()>, where we are using the A1 notation to start from the top left corner, then comes the reference to the C<@countries> array, followed by the format2.
When we pass an array reference to C<write()>, it will write the elements of the array in the same row. It is equivalent to write_row().
If You pass an array ref of array refs to C<write()>, it is the same as calling C<write_col()>, it will write to the columns, as demonstrated in the lines 22 and 27.

For more on C<write()>, please check the L<write section|https://metacpan.org/pod/Excel::Writer::XLSX#write(-$row,-$column,-$token,-$format-)> on the module's page.

=head2 Outro

Santa was cheerful about this guide, especially that it contains the long avaited Christmas cookie statistics. 
And perhaps the next task will be to extend this report with more Christmas cookies from around the world.

We just scratched the surface of C<Excel::Writer::XLSX> with this short tutorial. You can find a comprehensive guide on CPAN, L<Excel::Writer::XLSX|https://metacpan.org/pod/Excel::Writer::XLSX>.
This is a very useful and powerful module, which can deal with a range of tasks from the basics of generating reports to the heavy lifting of the work with VBA in Excel.
To cover all of its features would take a whole book.

You can find the whole script on my Github L<cookies_test.pl|https://github.com/x1mandi/padvent_code/blob/main/cookies_test.pl>, so that You can test it on Your own and play with the module.
Merry Christmas!



 
