Author: Thibault DUPONCHELLE <thibault.duponchelle@gmail.com>
Title: TWVycnkgQ2hyaXN0bWFzIDop
Topic: MIME::Base64

=encoding utf8

=head2 Perl birthday party

On the 18th of December, to celebrate Perl's birthday, the elves organized a big party with cakes, waffles, pancakes and maple sirup.

They partied like crazy but only until exactly midnight when everyone went to bed.

The day after, the elves walked to North Pole warehouse. To open the door and disable the alarm, as every day, they called the dedicated elf "Spof" to enter the code.
He typed the code and the security LCD printed "ERROR".

- Type it again, said another elf

He proceeded and, once again, got "ERROR".

- We are bad!

Then they looked at Spof, his face was all red and his eyes were all dizzy... They remembered that Spof drank a lot of maple sirup during the past day party, something like 5 glasses. And if you are not aware, elves should drink maple sirup with parsimony because else it drives them mad!

- What is the code? they asked

- TWVycnkgQ2hyaXN0bWFzIDop

- Are you sure?

- WWVz

=head2 Deciphering the code

One of the elves has a little experience with IT and he immediately thought he would test L<MIME::Base64> to translate this gibberish:

=begin perl

	use MIME::Base64 qw( decode_base64 );

	print decode_base64('TWVycnkgQ2hyaXN0bWFzIDop');

=end perl

Bingo! He got the code C<Merry Christmas :)> and elves were able to open the warehouse!

=head2 Secret is compromised!

But wait, now everyone is aware of the secret code, including you! This is not acceptable!

So some senior elves decided to change the code:

=begin perl

	use Env;
	use MIME::Base64 qw( encode_base64 );

	print encode_base64($ENV{SECRET});

=end perl

The above script is using an environment variable to pass the secret.

=head2 Make perl speak Spof's dialect

Aside from maple syrup, Spof enjoys doing some Perl scripting for himself the evening, so after this event he did (or at least he I<tried>).

Being still confused he tried to write C<cHJpbnQgIk1lcnJ5IENocmlzdG1hcyA6KSIK> but it was not working.

Confused but lazy, searched the L<MetaCPAN|https://metacpan.org/> for a solution and went with L<Acme::Base64>:

=begin perl

	use Acme::Base64;

	cHJpbnQgIk1lcnJ5IENocmlzdG1hcyA6KSIK

=end perl

This way, the C<perl> interpreter could understand the B<base64> dialect spoken by Spof! Magic!

=head2 Conclusion

You should never feed L<Gremlin|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gremlins> after midnight but you also need to monitor closely the maple sirup consumption of elves!

