Title: Bisecting Perl to find when something broke (or was fixed!)
Topic: bisect.pl
Author: Matthew Horsfall <WolfSage@gmail.com>

So, it's Christmas Eve and you've decided now's the time to update production to
the latest and greatest version of Perl. But since you don't want to spend your
holidays fixing production, you decide to build Perl on your dev machine and
run your ample test suite against it first.

One of your tests looks like this: (Why it has your production code in it I have
no idea):

  #!perl
  # t/a_test.t
  use strict;
  use warnings;

  use Test::More;
  plan tests => 4;

  sub terrible {
    my $gift = shift;

    return 1 if $gift =~ /(charcoal|sweater)/;
  }

  for my $gift qw(charcoal sweater) {
    ok(terrible($gift), "Gift $gift is terrible!");
  }

  for my $gift qw(car motorcycle) {
    ok(!terrible($gift), "Git $gift is awesome!");
  }

After upgrading Perl from 5.8.8 to 5.18.1, you find this test breaks:

  $ perl-5.18.1 ~/t/a_test.t
  "my" variable $gift masks earlier declaration in same statement at ~/t/a_test.t line 18.
  "my" variable $gift masks earlier declaration in same statement at ~/t/a_test.t line 19.
  syntax error at ~/t/a_test.t line 14, near "$gift qw(charcoal sweater)"
  Global symbol "$gift" requires explicit package name at ~/t/a_test.t line 15.
  Execution of ~/t/a_test.t aborted due to compilation errors.

But why?! That's perfectly valid Perl!

=head1 Bisecting to the rescue!

Thankfully, with a clone of the Perl git repository, we can answer this
question. So first we grab a copy:

  $ git clone git://perl5.git.perl.org/perl.git perl

In F<Porting/> you'll find a tool called F<bisect.pl>. This is a nice wrapper
around git bisect that will build Perl for each revision being tested and run
your tests, telling you when your test first broke.

However, this script cannot be run from the Perl repository it is testing, so
first we must make a copy of a clean checkout of blead:

  $ git clone perl perl-2

And now we can bisect Perl from 5.8.8 (when everything worked) to 5.18.1 (when
our world collapsed) and wait a very long time to get our results:

  $ cd perl-2
  $ ../perl/Porting/bisect.pl --start=perl-5.8.8 --end=v5.18.1 \
    -- ./perl -Ilib ~/t/a_test.t

Grab an egg nog, wrap some presents, write your memoirs, this will take awhile.

Optionally, we can make this go a I<little> faster, because we have an awesome
computer that we got last Christmas, and it can do many things in parallel.  We
just add a C<-j> option:

  $ ../perl/Porting/bisect.pl --start=perl-5.8.8 --end=v5.18.1 \
    -j 8 -- ./perl -Ilib ~/t/a_test.t

Note that while above C<--start> and C<--end> are git tags, instead they could
even be commit IDs.

Anyways, after waiting a long while the bisect finally finishes and tells us
this:

  [...]
  Use of qw(...) as parentheses is deprecated at ~/t/a_test.t line 14.
  Use of qw(...) as parentheses is deprecated at ~/t/a_test.t line 18.
  1..4
  ok 1 - Gift charcoal is terrible!
  ok 2 - Gift sweater is terrible!
  ok 3 - Git car is awesome!
  ok 4 - Git motorcycle is awesome!
  HEAD is now at eb3d0a5 Block signals during fork (fixes RT#82580)
  good - zero exit from ./perl -Ilib ~/t/a_test.t

  417a992d4dc78be79e44d19e029d9742d0334128 is the first bad commit
  commit 417a992d4dc78be79e44d19e029d9742d0334128
  Author: Zefram <zefram@fysh.org>
  Date:   Fri May 25 22:25:21 2012 +0100

      remove deprecated qw-as-parens behaviour
  ⋮
  bisect run success
  That took 2019 seconds

Voila! And knowing that, we can fix our test by changing:

  #!perl
  for my $gift qw(charcoal sweater) {

To

  #!perl
  for my $gift (qw(charcoal sweater)) {

And

  #!perl
  for my $gift qw(car motorcycle) {

To

  #!perl
  for my $gift (qw(car motorcycle)) {

And upgrade our servers and go home and enjoy the holidays!

=head1 A few more tricks…

There are a few more neat things that F<bisect.pl> can also do for us, and its
documentation includes examples of many of them.

For example, you don't need to provide a start and end, that just speeds things
up:

  # When did this become an error?
  ../perl/Porting/bisect.pl -e 'my $a := 2;'

Or you can search for the reverse:

  # When did this start working?
  ../perl/Porting/bisect.pl --expect-fail -e '1 // 2'

Check out C<perldoc Porting/pod/bisect-runner.pl> for more information.

=head1 In closing

F<bisect.pl> is an incredibly useful tool. Here, we used it to find why some
external Perl program failed, but it's most often used to figure out when
something broke in Perl itself.

If you hack on the Perl language, keep this in your toolbelt. It will save you
time and frustration.

