Title: DateTimes
Topic: DateTime::Moonpig
Author: Mark Jason Dominus (陶敏修) <mjd@plover.com>

The L<DateTime> suite is an impressive tour de force, but I hate its
interface. The methods it provides are usually not the ones you want,
and the things it makes easy are often things that are not useful.

=head2 Mutators

The most obvious example is that it has too many mutators.  I believe
that date-time values are a kind of number, and should be treated like
numbers. In particular they should be immutable.  Rik Signes has
L<http://rjbs.manxome.org/rubric/entry/1929|a hair-raising story>
about an accidental mutation that caused a hard to diagnose bug,
because the C<add_duration> method modifies the object on which it is
called, instead of returning a new object.

=head2 DateTime::Duration

But the most I<severe> example, the one that drives me into a rage, is
that the C<subtract_datetime> method returns a L<DateTime::Duration> object,
and this object is never what you want, because it is impossible to
use it usefully.

For example, suppose you would like to know how much time elapses
between 1969-04-02 02:38:17 EST and 2013-12-25 21:00:00 EST.  You can
set up the two M<DateTime> objects for the time, and subtract them
using the overloaded minus operator:

	#!perl
	my ($a) = DateTime->new( year => 1969, month => 04, day => 02,
				 hour => 2, minute => 38, second => 17,
				 time_zone => "America/New_York" ) ;

	my ($b) = DateTime->new( year => 2013, month => 12, day => 25,
				 hour => 21, minute => 0, second => 0,
				 time_zone => "America/New_York" ) ;

	my $difference = $b - $a;

Internally this invokes C<subtract_datetime> to yield a
DateTime::Duration object for the difference.  The
DateTime::Duration object C<$diff> will contain the information
that this is a difference of 536 months, 23 days, 1101 minutes, and 43
seconds, a fact which seems to me to be of very limited usefulness.

You might want to know how long this interval is, so you can compare
it to similar intervals.  So you might want to know how many seconds
this is.  It happens that the two times are exactly 1,411,669,328
seconds apart, but there's no way to get the C<$difference> object to
tell you this.

It I<seems> like there are methods that will get you the actual
elapsed time in seconds, but none of them will do it.  For example,
C<< $difference->in_units('seconds') >> looks promising, but will
return 43, which is the 43 seconds left over after you've thrown away
the 536 months, 23 days, and 1101 minutes.  I don't know what the use
case for this is supposed to be.

And indeed, no method can tell you how long the duration really is,
because the subtraction has thrown away all the information about how
long the days and months and years were—days, months and years vary
in length—so it simply doesn't know how much time this object
actually represents.  I don't know why the designer of
DateTime::Duration thought it would be a good idea to throw this
information away, but that's what it does.  And I don't know why the
designer of DateTime thought it would be a good idea to overload
the subtraction operator to make it easy to throw this information
away, but that's what it does.

Similarly if you wanted to know how many days there are between the
two dates, the DateTime::Duration object won't tell you because it
can't tell you.  If you had the elapsed seconds difference, you could
convert it to the correct number of days simply by dividing by 86400
and rounding off.  This works because, even though days vary in
length, they don't vary by much, and the variations cancel out over
the course of a year.  If you do this you find that the elapsed number
of days is approximately 16338.7653, which rounds off to 16338 or
16339 depending on how you want to treat the 18-hour time-of-day
difference.  This result is not I<quite> exact, but the error is on
the order of 0.000002%.  So the elapsed seconds are useful, and you
can compute other useful values with them, and get useful answers. In
contrast, DateTime::Duration's answer of "536 months and 23 days"
is I<completely> useless because months vary in length by nearly 10%
and DateTime has thrown away the information about how long the
months were.  The best you can do to guess the number of days from
this is to calculate the 536 months by 30.4375, which is the average
number of days in a month, and add 23.  This is clumsy, and gets you
16337 days—which is close, but wrong.

To get what I consider a useful answer out of the DateTime objects
you I<must not> use the overloaded subtraction operator; instead you
must do this:

        #!perl
        $b->subtract_datetime_absolute($a)->in_units('seconds')

=head2 What's M<DateTime::Moonpig> for?

L<DateTime::Moonpig> attempts to get rid of the part of DateTime I
don't like and keep the part I do like, by changing the interface and
leaving the internals alone.  I developed it for
L<the I<Moonpig> billing system that Rik Signes and I
did|http://blog.plover.com/prog/Moonpig.html>; hence the name.

DateTime::Moonpig introduces four main changes to the interface of
DateTime:

=over 4

=item 1.

Most of the mutators are gone.  They throw fatal exceptions if you try
to call them.

=item 2.

The overridden addition and subtraction operators have been changed to
eliminate M<DateTime::Duration> entirely.  Subtracting two
M<DateTime::Moonpig> object yields the difference in seconds, as an
ordinary Perl number.  This means that instead of

        #!perl
        $x = $b->subtract_datetime_absolute($a)->in_units('seconds')

one can write

        #!perl
        $x = $b - $a

From here it's easy to get the approximate number of days difference:
just divide by 3600.  Similarly, dividing this by 3600 gets the number
of hours difference.

Also, an integer number of seconds can be added to or subtracted from
a DateTime::Moonpig object; this yields a new object representing a
time that is that many seconds later or earlier.  Writing C<$date + 2>
is much more convenient than writing C<< $date->clone->add( seconds =>
2 ) >>.

If you are not concerned with perfect exactness, you can write

  #!perl
  sub days { $_[0] * 86400 }

	my $tomorrow = $now + days(1);

This might be off by an hour if there is an intervening DST change, or
by a second if there is an intervening leap second, but in many cases
one simply doesn't care.

=item 3.

The constructor is extended to accept an epoch time such as
is returned by Perl's built-in C<time()> or C<stat()> functions.  This
means that one can abbreviate this:

        #!perl
        DateTime->from_epoch( epoch => $epoch )

to this:

        #!perl
        DateTime::Moonpig->new( $epoch )

=item 4.

The default time zone has been changed from M<DateTime>'s "floating"
time zone to UTC. I think the "floating" time zone is a mistake, and
it has bad interactions with C<set_time_zome>, which
C<DateTime::Moonpig> does I<not> disable.

=item 5. 

I added a few additional methods I found convenient.

=back

Under the covers, it is all just DateTime objects, which seem to do
what one needs.  Other than the mutators, all the many DateTime
methods work just the same; you are even free to use C<<
->subtract_datetime >> to obtain a DateTime::Duration object if
you enjoy being trapped in an absurdist theatre production.

When I first started this module, I thought it was likely to be a
failed experiment.  I expected that the Moonpig::DateTime objects
would break once ina while, or that some operation on them would return
a DateTime instead of a Moonpig::DateTime, which would cause
some later method call to fail.  But to my surprise, it worked well.
It has been in regular use in I<Moonpig> for several years.

I recently split it out of I<Moonpig>, and released it to CPAN, and I
will be interested to find out if it works well in other contexts.  I
am worried that disabling the mutators has left a gap in functionality
that needs to be filled by something else, for example.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<DateTime::Moonpig>
* L<DateTime>
* L<DateTime::Duration>
