Title: Organizing catalogues and wishlists with Dancer::SearchApp
Topic: Dancer::SearchApp
Author: Corion <corion@cpan.org>

=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 Finding presents instead of searching

Many children are under the assumption that Santa needs to work only one day a
year, when he distributes all the presents across the world. But there is a lot
of work that has to go into the preparation for this day. Especially the choice
of presents is an issue - while Santa knows who's been naughty and who's been
nice, he also has a list of the wishes of each child. Santa also needs to
monitor closely the demand and availability of presents to match the wishes to
the gifts.

Of course, Santas suppliers provide even the most festive descriptions of the
items.  The sheer supply of possible gifts makes it difficult even for Santa and
his elves to remember the numbering schemes and descriptions of the various
items. And as the wishes and potential presents come in at a time when the
preparations are already in full swing and Christmas is close, there is little
time to dedicate elves to categorizing the gifts.

=head2 Finding things

Ideally, any of the elves could use some kind of search engine to find an
appropriate present for a child. Of course, companies like Google already
provide a solution to finding the most appropriate thing in the stack of
proposed gifts for a wish of a child. But Santa is peculiar about sharing his
knowledge with others. While he knows who's going to get their wish and who's
going to get coal, he feels that sharing that knowledge with other parties is
not a good approach. What is known at the North Pole stays at the North Pole.

So his approach is to build his own search engine.

=head2 Parts

The search engine consists of three parts, the Crawler, the Index and the
Searchform.

=head3 Crawler

Most catalogues come in as files on the filesystem, one file per potential
present. The letters and wishlists all get stored in a large IMAP server. The
crawler is then responsible for reading all the information about gifts and
storing it in the index. Currently, the module comes with two separate crawlers,
one for the filesystem and one for an IMAP store. Both crawlers take all items,
read them and extract the text from them and write them to the search index.

Santa wants to store some key facts as metadata with every document. For example
the author and sent date are extracted for every wishlist. Imagine giving a gift
for a 40-year old to their 8 year old self.

=head3 Index

The search index is provided by the Elasticsearch search index, with
L<Search::Elasticsearch> as the Perl interface. The index is a data structure
that allows for quick retrieval of documents given some words that are
associated with the documents. When storing the document information,
Elasticsearch also adds more data like synonyms so that the wish for I<a
tricycle> can also find I<ASIN20161225, vehicle, three wheeled> or other
synonyms.

=head3 Searchform

The front end is provided by a Dancer application. It consists mostly of a form
field where elves enter the wish and submit the query. The L<Dancer> application
ties together the Elasticsearch index and search functionality and returns word
completion and matching documents for each query.

=head2 Making presents

Santa himself cannot make his presence known, but a reimplementation of the
search engine has been released on CPAN as L<Dancer::SearchApp>. It includes the
two crawler programs and the search form. You still need to add the special
spice that is Elasticsearch.

=head3 Installation and setup

Before you can search your documents, you have to install the prerequisites
and then import some documents. The upside is that there are importers that
read from the filesystem and IMAP mail stores. The downside is that you will
need to install some software that is not available via CPAN.

=over 4

=item *

Install Java JRE 8

That's what Elasticsearch needs.

=item *

Install Elasticsearch 5.x

Installing Elasticsearch is as easy as downloading the latest release
from L<https://www.elastic.co/downloads/elasticsearch>. For this document,
we'll assume that you the Elasticsearch configuration directory is
at C<< /opt/elasticsearch/config >>.

=item *

Configure Elasticsearch

The search engine needs an English dictionary of synonyms.
A good English synonym dictionary can be found at
L<https://sites.google.com/site/kevinbouge/synonyms-lists>. Download the
file for English from there and save it to

  /opt/elasticsearch/config/synonyms/synonyms_en.txt

If you don't want to install one, create an empty file.

=item *

Download L<Dancer::SearchApp> from CPAN

These instructions download the distribution into a temporary directory for this
test run.
If you are satisfied with the configuration, copy the complete tree to a more
permament location.

  cpanm --look Dancer::SearchApp
  cpanm --installdeps .

Note the current directory, as that is where the configuration will happen.

=item *

Install Apache Tika

Download the Tika server from L<https://tika.apache.org/download.html>

The current version is
L<http://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.cgi/tika/tika-server-1.14.jar>

Copy the JAR file into the directory C< jar/> of the distribution.

=back

=head3 Indexing content

Indexing content is done from the installation directory where you unpacked
the CPAN distribution into. As Elasticsearch updates its index live there is
no need to wait for an index run to finish before you can start searching your
data through the web interface.

=over 4

=item *

Indexing files on the disk

Files on disk are indexed by invoking C<< bin/index-filesystem.pl >> and giving
it one or more directories.

  perl -Ilib -w bin/index-filesystem.pl -f t/documents

For better control, you can give it a configuration file. There is an example
configuration file in the C<< config-examples/ >> directory of the distribution.

=item *

Indexing an IMAP account

If you want to be able to search your email, you have to import it from the
IMAP server into the search index.
Copy the config file from C< config-examples/imap-import.yml >
and edit the username, password, server and folders to index. Then run
the IMAP indexer. If you are like me and have most of your email history
available, this may take a while.

  perl -Ilib -w bin/index-imap.pl -c my-imap-import.yml

=back