=head1 NAME

Promises - who has promised an article

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This lists who has promised an article for 2015 advent calendar.


=head2 Calendar

=over

=item 1st: DONE: Mark's GeoIP2 article

=item 2nd: DONE: Jame's Reply article

=item 3rd: DONE: Graham's FFI::Plat article

=item 4th: DONE: Evil's Devel::Hide article

=item 5th: DONE: Davorg's Lingua::EN::Inflexion article

=item 6th: DONE: Dave P's Convert::CookingTimes article

=item 7th: DONE: Alex's Text::Hogan article

=item 8th: DONE: Shoichi Kaji's App::cpm article

=item 9th: DONE: Yanic's Web::Query article

Does this need additional work?  Maybe

=item 10th DONE: Mark's CPANFILE article

Fixing the vertical alignment on the +/- would be nice

=item 11th: Reserved for Neil Bower's article

=item 12th: Reserved for fREW's article

=item 13th: Reserved for Yanick's JSON::Path Article

Basic article in, needs spiffing up

WRITING WORK FOR MARK HERE

=item 14th: Reserved for Mark's Acme::MetaSyntactic article

WRITING WORK OFR MARK HERE

=item 15th: Reserved for Yanick's File::Serialize article

Basic article in, needs spiffing up

WRITING WORK FOR MARK HERE

=item 16th: Reserved for Dave Rolsky's article

=item 17th: Reserved for rjb's arcticle

=item 18th: Reserved for Ivan's article

The first draft of this is in, I just need to rework it

WRITING WORK FOR MARK HERE

=item 19th: Reserved for Olaf's article

=item 20th: Reserved for rjbs's article

=item 21st: Reserved for Maxim Vuets 

=item 22nd: Reserved for Marcus' article

=item 23rd: Diego Kuperman

Currently AWOL.  May need replacing.

=item 23rd: Reserved for 松木雅幸's article

Currently AWOL.  May need replacing

=item 24th: Reserved for Paul Evan's Article

Paul promised us an article but hasn't been told what to write.  Thus we should
give him an article topic before the first of december and give him as much
time as possible

=item 25th: Thank you page / Mark's feature article

Not sure which we'll use here yet.

WRITING WORK FOR MARK HERE

=back

=head2 Delivered

=over

=item Shoichi Kaji

Sholichi is going to write about C<cpm>, and should have something by 2015-11-22

=item Reply

Thanks James Laver

=item Alex Balhatchet

Text::Hogan

=item Mark Fowler: GeoIP2

An article on the elves struggle to build a real-time on-the-ground problem reporting website, using GeoIP2 to locate the map on the web interface

=item Dave Cross

Dave was going to write about Lingua::EN::Inflexion

=item David Cantrell

Was going to pick Devel::Hide, talk about testing code both with and without optional dependencies, and maybe about some of the more evil things you can do with sub-refs in @INC.

=item David Precious

Wrote about Convert::CookingTimes

=item Graham Ollis

Graham wrote about FFI::Platypus 

=item Yanick Champoux: Web::Query

Mostly reworked and in

=item Mark Fowler: cpanfile

=back

=head2 First Draft In:

=over

=item fREW Schmidt

Is going to write about Config::Station

Status First draft delivered 2015-11-14.  Feedback worked on.

=item Neil Bowers

Is going to write about Smart::Comments

Status: first draft in

=item Yanick Champoux: JSON:Path

=item Yanick Champoux: File::Serialize

=item Ivan Kruglov

Is going to write about Sereal

In, needs some work.

=back

=head2 Promised, and Planned and actively working on it

=over

=item Dave Rolsky

Dave is going to be writing about the Elves using Stepford to make the naughty and nice list, and has promised to deliver by December 1st.

=item Mark Fowler: feature

An article on using the feature pragma to load the new and exciting features in Perl

Status: Mostly written

=item Mark Fowler: Acme::MetaSyntactic

An article on the I<poor man's debugger> using C<print STDERR "crunch_eth clank_est\n";>.  Discusses lots about how to shell out to Perl from OS X

Status: The bit on Acme::MetaSyntactic is done, need to flesh out the OS X bit

=item Ricardo Signes

Is hoping to write about Lexical::Var

Last chased 2015-11-24, says "it weighs heavily on him"

=item Maxim Vuets 

Maxim would like to write
about basic techniques to do fuzzy string matching in Perl. I'm going
to cover Text::Fuzzy, Data::CosineSimilarity, Text::Ngram, and
Text::Soundex at least.

Chased via email 2015-11-10.  Replied 2015-11-10 saying "this week"

=item Olaf Alders

Is going to write about Sort::ByExample

Last chased on slack 2015-11-24

=item Marcus Ramberg

Is going to write about Marvin

Said "this week" on 2015-11-25

=back

=head2 Promised, Planned, but AWOL

=over

=item 松木雅幸

Is going to write about "Perl and Redis" and Redis::Fast / Redis::LeaderBoard

Chased via email 2015-11-10

=item Diego Kuperman

Resque.  Chased 2015-11-15.

=back

=head2 Promised, but not Planned

=over

=item Paul Evans

Says he'll write an article if we give him a good idea of what to write about.

=back

=head2 Other

=over

=item David Golden

On 2015-05-26: "Can't commit this early. Feel free to ask in November if you
have holes to fill"

=back

=head2 Ideas for Future Articles

Possible ideas if someone fails to deliver:

=over

=item App::cpanminus

Easy installation from the commmand line from the cpan.  Installing a previous
version from the CPAN.  Installing from a checkout.  Installing direct from
github.

=item List::Gather

=item http://www.slideshare.net/junichiishida/great-tools-heavily-used-in-japan-you-dont-know

There's a lot of modules here that are worth writing about

=item https://github.com/hachiojipm/awesome-perl

List of awesome modules

=back


