Title:  Perl and Redis
Topic:  Redis::*
Author: Masayuki Matsuki <songmu@cpan.org>

=pod

Redis is high performance in memory key-value-store and data structure server.
It runs as a simple daemon alongside your Perl code that you can talk to over
the network sending data back and forward for it to persist between invocations
and between processes.

We find that it has affinity with the way we write our application code:  We can
use Redis variables and data structures as I<super global variables> that are
not only accessible from everywhere in a Perl script but from every process on
every server in our infrastructure every time they run.  It is very useful and
powerful (and dangerous :p).

These global variables have lots of use, from a simple shared cache, to things
like global work queues, process synchronization, or shared leader boards.

    shell$ redis-cli ping
    PONG
    shell$ redis-cli set snowman frosty
    OK
    shell$ redis-cli get snowman
    "frosty"
    shell$ redis-cli lpush gifts gold
    (integer) 1
    shell$ redis-cli lpush gifts frankincense
    (integer) 2
    shell$ redis-cli lpush gifts myrrh
    (integer) 3
    shell$ redis-cli lpop gifts
    "myrrh"
    shell$ redis-cli lpop gifts
    "frankincense"
    shell$ redis-cli lpop gifts
    "gold"
    shell$ redis-cli lpop gifts
    (nil)
    shell$

L<< Redis's documentation| http://redis.io/documentation >> is very full and we
can try the commands in the L<< interactive console|http://redis.io/commands>>
in a web browser!

Let's introduce the CPAN modules around Redis.

=head2 L<Redis>

The original Redis module is a Perl interface to talk to a Redis server: 

    #!perl
    my $redis = Redis->new;
    $redis->incr('blah');

Redis.pm is pure Perl implementation so, stable and easy to understand, but
a little bit slow, especially for caching where you don't want a lot of
overhead.

=head2 L<Redis>

The original Redis module is an Perl interface to talk to a Redis server: 

    #!perl
    my $redis = Redis->new;
    $redis->incr('blah');

Redis.pm is pure Perl implementation so, stable and easy to understand, but
little a bit slow, especially for caching where you don't want a lot of
overhead.

=head2 L<Redis::Fast>

L<Redis::Fast> is an alternative faster client module for Redis.  It has
the same Redis.pm interfaces built using XS, so "Fast".  You can use
Redis::Fast instead of Redis.pm without making an code changes other than
initially instantiating a different object.

    #!perl
    my $redis = Redis::Fast->new;
    $redis->incr('blah');

In my work (online games, SNS and so on), Redis::Fast is also stable and very
fast.

=head2 L<Cache::Redis>

L<Cache::Cache> is a standard caching interface while allows you to easily swap
out backend caching technologies - in memory stores, on disk files, memcache,
etc - without making changes to your code.

<<<<<<< HEAD
I wanted to use Redis as caching storage so I wrote L<Cache::Cache> compatible
=======
I wanted to use Redis as caching storage so I wrote a L<Cache::Cache> compatible
>>>>>>> 0e86f1e73f7840ece4ccc6507d3e89468943838a
interface client library for Redis called Cache::Redis:

    #!perl
    my $redis = Redis::Fast->new; # you can use Redis.pm too.
    my $cache = Cache::Redis->new(redis => $redis);
    $cache->set(blah => 1);
    say $cache->get('blah'); # 1

Redis also has an interface, L<CHI::Driver::Redis>, to the L<CHI> caching
framework.

=head2 L<Redis::LeaderBoard>

Redis not only allows you to store simple key/value pairs on the server, but
has a rich API that allows you to manipulate more complex data structures that
it can store.

Redis's "sorted set" is very useful for creating leaderboards but, which don't
return "unique" rank (cf. L<https://github.com/antirez/redis/issues/943>>). So I
wrote the ranking module using Redis which takes care of "unique" rank.

    #!perl
    use Redis::Fast;
    use Redis::LeaderBoard;
    my $redis = Redis::Fast->new;
    my $lb = Redis::LeaderBoard->new(
        redis => $redis,
        key   => 'leader_board:1',
        order => 'asc', # asc/desc, desc as default
    );
    $lb->set_score(one => 100);
    $lb->set_score(two =>  50);
    my ($rank, $score) = $lb->get_rank_with_score('one'); #=> (1, 100)

I introduce a technique. That is "using epoch as score".

    #!perl
    my $lb = Redis::LeaderBoard->new(
        redis => $redis,
        key   => 'recent_post',
        limit => 20,
    );
    $lb->set_score($url, $updated->epoch);
    ...
    # you can get recent posts up to 20 entries
    my $recent_posts = $lb->rankings;

=head2 L<Redis::Namespace>

Generally, key management of a key-value-store is very difficult and confusing
(easy to conflict with existing keys used elsewhere in code or other
applications using the same Redis server, typo and so on). Key-value-store is
very cool, but with this "super global variables store" we must appropriately
manage the keys.

We can use Redis::Namespace for better key name management.

    #!perl
    my $redis = Redis::Fast->new;
    my $ns = Redis::Namespace->new(redis => $redis, namespace => 'ranking');
    $ns->set(foo => 'bar');    # will call $redis->set('fugu:foo', 'bar');
    my $foo = $ns->get('foo'); # will call $redis->get('fugu:foo');

The object of Redis::Namespace is to fill up the prefix namespace automatically.
I recommend the all Redis objects are wrapped by Redis::Namespace.

=head2 Conclusion

CPAN's Redis modules allow you to quickly, easily, and safely leverage the
power of Redis from Perl.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=for :list
* L<Redis>
* L<Redis::Fast>
* L<CHI::Driver::Redis> and L<CHI>
* L<Cache::Redis> an L<Cache::Cache>
* L<Redis::LeaderBoard>
* L<Redis::Namespace>
* L<< Redis's documentation| http://redis.io/documentation >>
