Title: The Perl of Christmas Future 
Topic: feature
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

=pod

Rather being like the fabled Ebenezer Scrooge, staring into his own grave of
Christmas Future, Perl 5 is an evolving language giving back to its loved ones
every yearly release, ensuring its beloved for years to come with new features
and capabilities in the core language itself.

Recent releases of perl pack a lot of features than aren't available by default
(to preserve backwards compatibility), but can be easily enabled by using the
C<feature> keyword.  They even ship with many experimental features that give us
a glance of Perl-yet-to-come.

=head2 Beyond Modern Perl

Here's some old-school code written to work on any Perl:
  
   #!perl
   my $sled;
   sub pack_naughty_coal {
      my $self = shift;
      my $packer = shift;
      my $driver = shift || $SANTA;

      $sled ||= Sled->new();

      foreach my $person (@{ $self->naughty_list }) {
         # never load coal for the driver even if they're on the list!
         next if $person->name =~ /\A\Q$driver\E\z/i;

         print STDERR 'Loading coal for ' . $person->name . "\n";
         $packer->pack_coal_for($person, $sled);
      }

      return;
   }

By enabling the right features in Perl we can turn the above code into the
much more readable futuristic Perl:

   #!perl
   sub pack_naughty_coal($self, $packer, $driver = $SANTA) {
      state $sled = Sled->new();

      foreach my $person ($self->naughty_list->*@) {
         # never load coal for the driver even if they're on the list!
         next if fc $person->name eq fc $driver;

         say STDERR 'Loading coal for ' . $person->name;
         $packer->pack_coal_for($person,$sled);
      }
      return;
   }

This uses five of the thirteen features available in Perl 5.22

=for :list
* The C<state> feature
* The C<fc> feature
* The C<say> feature
* The C<signatures> feature (still I<experimental> in 5.22)
* The C<postref> feature (still I<experimental> in 5.22)

=head2 Enabling Features

New features in Perl can be enabled in your code one of three ways:

=over

=item By explicitly turning them on

You can explicitly turn on the features you want for lexical scope with the
C<feature> pragma.

  #!perl
  use feature 'say';
  say 'Merry Christmas';

If you use an experimental feature you'll probably want to disable the warnings
for that also:

  #!perl
  use feature 'signatures';
  no warnings 'experimental::signatures';
  sub ask_santa_for($wish) {
     ...
  }

Or, preferably, just use the C<experimental> pragma:

  #!perl
  use experimental 'signatures';
  sub ask_santa_for($wish) {
     ...
  }

However, you should be aware that experimental features are just that - they
can change without notice, and if they do...you've got no-one to blame but
yourself!  The future isn't here yet, after all.

=item By requiring a version of Perl

Instead of explicitly stating the feature that you want to use, you can enable
for the current lexical scope all the non experimental features supported by a
particular version of Perl by requiring a particular version of Perl:

   #!perl
   use 5.022;
   say 'Merry Christmas';

=item By using C<-E>

Using C<-E> at the command line will turn on all the non-experimental features
for the version of Perl that's executing the script:

   perl -E 'say "Merry Christmas";' 

=back

=head2 Looking At The Experimental Features Used In The Example

These descriptions are accurate as of 5.22, but by the very nature of
experimental features the functionality might have changed if you're reading
this article in the distant future (Enjoy your flying cars and melted ice caps.)

=head3 The 'signature' feature

My favorite feature so far, subroutine signatures are a still experimental
feature that allow us to avoid having to write explicit code to extract
arguments from C<@_>.  Instead, as is common in many other languages, you can
simply write an argument list next to the subroutine declaration!  This means
this:

  #!perl
  sub give {
     my $person = shift;
     my $gift   = shift;
     ...
  }

Can be more compactly written as:

  #!perl
  sub give($person,$gift) {
    ...
  }

Under the hood Perl builds the necessary instructions as if we'd written the
code to do the argument manipulation and checking ourselves manually.  If we use
deparse the source code we can actually see the equivalent code:

   shell$ perl -Mfeature=signatures -MO=Deparse -e 'sub give($person,$gift) { return 1 }'
   The signatures feature is experimental at -e line 1.
   sub give {
       use feature 'signatures';
       die sprintf("Too many arguments for subroutine at %s line %d.\n", (caller)[1, 2]) unless @_ <= 2;
       die sprintf("Too few arguments for subroutine at %s line %d.\n", (caller)[1, 2]) unless @_ >= 2;
       my $person = $_[0];
       my $gift = $_[1];
       ();
       return 1;
   }

Perl signatures have a bunch of really clever tricks, including being able to
use I<slurpy> operators to put a variable number of arguments into an array:

   #!perl
   sub prep_sleigh($sled, @reindeer) {
     ...
   }

   prep_sleigh(
     "BigRed2000",
     "Dasher",
     "Dancer",
     "Prancer",
     "Vixen",
     "Comet",
     "Cupid",
     "Dunder",
     "Blixem",
   );

They also allow you to specify hashes in the argument list (which will error if
a non even number of things are passed in):

   #!perl
   sub bake_cookies(%args) {
     ...
   }

   bake_cookies(
      number => 100,
      type => "chocolate",
      icing => 1,
   );

They allow you to use placeholder unnamed arguments that you want to allow to be
passed in without error but don't actually want to do anything with (I find this
very handy when writing methods / callbacks being called from code you didn't
write that may be updated to have extra arguments later)

   #!perl
   my $delivery_callback = sub($address, $status, @) {
      if ($status) {
         say $log "Presents delivered to $address\n";
         return;
      }
      say $log "WARNING: Presents could not be delivered to $address";
   };

One of the most advanced features currently supported is default values;  If
the argument isn't passed then the default is used:

   #!perl
   sub leave_food_for_santa($where, $what = $MINCE_PIES) {
      ...
   }

You can even put arbitary code in there to do whatever you want, for example
picking a default at random:

  #!perl
  sub leave_food_for_santa($where, $what = rand() > 0.5 ? $MINCE_PIES : $XMAS_PUDDING) {
     ...
  }

=head3 Postfix Dereferencing

The standard C<@{ ... }> array dereferencing syntax I<surrounds> the array
reference that it dereferences. This works pretty well for small values:

  #!perl
  my $arrayref = [];
  my @array = @{ $arrayref };

Or even for slightly more complex things:

  #!perl
  foreach my $thingy (@{ $self->thingy_that_returns_an_arrayref }) {
    ...
  }

But it can get pretty darn hairy where the thing you're surrounding gets very
long.

  #!perl
  my @shows = @{
    TV::Schedule->new
                ->filter( subscribed => 1 )
                ->search( show => "My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic")
                ->type("Christmas Special")
  };

By the time you get down to reading the closing C<}> you've forgotten what it
was for!  This can be written a lot clearer with the C<@*> array dereferencing
syntax.

  #!perl
  my @shows = TV::Schedule->new
                          ->filter( subscribed => 1 )
                          ->search( show => "My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic")
                          ->type("Christmas Special")
                          ->@*;

You can also do something similar with hashrefs!  Instead of writing:

  #!perl
  sub drive_deer($self) {
    say "On $_!" for sort keys %{ $self->sled->deer_team->details_hashrefs };
  }

You can simply write:

  #!perl
  sub drive_deer($self) {
    say "On $_!" for sort keys $self->sled->deer_team->details_hashrefs->%*;
  }

=head2 Standard Features Used In The Example

I also took advantage of a bunch of non-experimental features in Perl.  If
you're writing Perl for a known version of Perl, you pretty much should be using
these as default now.
   
=head3 The C<say> Feature

Available since Perl 5.10, the C<say> keyword is equivalent to the C<print>
keyword with a newline automatically appended.  Thus instead of writing:

   #!perl
   print STDERR 'Loading coal for ' . $kid->name . "\n";

We can just write:

   #!perl
   say STDERR 'Loading coal for ' . $kid->name;

=head3 The C<state> Feature

The state feature introduces a new keyword to declare, C<state>, that works just
like a C<my> execept the code on the right hand side of the expression is only
evaluated the first time the line is executed and the variable maintains state
every time you re-enter that lexical scope.

The upshot of this is that things like locally-scoped long-lived variables like
counters just got a lot easier to write:

   #!perl
   {
      my $counter = 0;
      sub id {
        $counter++;
        return $counter;
      }
   }

Can be simply rewritten as:

   #!perl
   sub id {
     state $counter = 0;
     $counter++;
     return $counter;
   }

=head3 The C<fc> Feature

Doing proper case insensitive comparison of strings is...hard.  Sure, it's easy
when you're only worrying about ASCII characters, but for more advanced
character sets where round tripping doesn't work, you can't just always C<uc> or
C<lc> the strings.

  #!perl
  # for these characters only lc works
  lc("\x{212A}") eq lc("K");  # true!
  uc("\x{212A}") eq uc("K");  # false!

  # for these characters only uc works
  lc("\x{03C2}") eq lc("\x{03C3}");  # false!
  uc("\x{03C2}") eq uc("\x{03C3}");  # true!

Rather than a I<lower case> or I<upper case> operator we need a I<folding case>
operator that gives us something we can use to compare to see if the strings
really are the same case-insensitively.  And that operator?  It's C<fc>:

  #!perl
  fc("\x{212A}") eq fc("K");         # true!
  fc("\x{03C2}") eq fc("\x{03C3}");  # true!

=head1 SEE ALSO

=for :list
* L<feature>
* L<rjbs YAPC::NA Video on YouTube on Postfix Dereferencing|https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1LHFKGHceY&t=360>
* L<rjbs YAPC::NA Video on YouTube on Subroutine Signatures|https://youtu.be/D1LHFKGHceY?t=2341>
* L<http://www.effectiveperlprogramming.com/2015/04/use-v5-20-subroutine-signatures/>
* L<http://www.effectiveperlprogramming.com/2014/09/use-postfix-dereferencing/>
* L<http://www.effectiveperlprogramming.com/2012/02/fold-cases-properly/>
