Title: One More Thing
Topic: Perl Advent 2015
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

Merry Christmas, Happy Holidays, and good tidings to you all.  We've concluded
the sixteenth annual Perl Advent Calendar in good cheer and good spirits. 

=head2 Without You This Would Not Be Possible

The Perl Advent Calendar is a team effort, and it wouldn't be possible to
produce it without the help from everyone involved.  This year thanks are due
for the contributions made by Alex Balhatchet, Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt, Dave
Cross, Dave Rolsky, David Cantrell, David Precious, Graham Ollis, Ivan Kruglov,
James Laver, Johann Rolschewski, Marcus Ramberg, Mark Fowler, Masayuki Matsuki,
Neil Bowers, Olaf Alders, openstrike, Pete Houston, Paul "LeoNerd" Evans,
Ricardo SIGNES, Sergey Romanov, Shoichi Kaji, and Yanick Champoux.  Thanks
everyone!

And of course, it wouldn't be possible without all the readers enjoying the
articles each day, so thanks to you too.

In early February 2016 I'll be starting the whole process over again with a call
for participation for the 2016 Perl Advent Calendar.  If you're reading then
then I'd strongly recommend you write an article, especially if you've not
written one before!

=head2 The Gift of The CPAN

Advent may be once again over but the CPAN is the gift that keeps on giving,
and each year it gets better and better!

Right now as I write this the CPAN has one hundred and fifty eight thousand five
hundred and fifty nine modules published to it. That means that - in addition to
updates to existing modules - since I wrote this Christmas Day entry last year
for the 2014 Advent Calendar sixteen thousand eight hundred and ten new modules
have been uploaded, or in other words a growth of nearly 12% in just one year!

To put this in some context, if you took just five minutes to install, examine
and play with each of these new modules it'd be nearly the end of February
before you were done (If you were to do the same for every module on the
CPAN...you'd miss next year's advent calendar totally and you'd finally be
done in June 2017!)  That is, assuming of course, you didn't stop to sleep or
eat or anything else.

This sounds like a lot of work!  Where can you find out about all this the
I<lazy> way? As always:

=for html
<ul>
  <li>You can search for Perl modules at <a href="https://metacpan.org/">metacpan</a>
  where you can also see a list of <a href="https://metacpan.org/recent">recently
  published modules</li><li><a href="http://cpanratings.perl.org/">CPAN Ratings</a> offers a ratings
  and reviews of Perl modules.  It's like a democratic advent calendar each day
  of the year!</li>
  <li>The <a href="http://perlweekly.com/">Perl Weekly</a> provides one small
  succinct email a week with a summary of the interesting things happing in Perl
  that week, including new modules, interesting articles and upcoming events.</li>
  <li><a href="http://blogs.perl.org/">blogs.perl.org</a> hosts a vast number of
  Perl blogs if you're looking for more articles to read throughout the year.  The <a href="http://ironman.enlightenedperl.org/">
  Perl Ironman Challenge</a> links to a lot more blogs as part of the <em>updating
  your Perl blog weekly</em> challenge</li>
  <li>Of course, if you want more Perl Advent articles, there's always the
  previous <a href="http://perladvent.org/archives.html">fifteen years of advent
  calendar</a> to go through.  Happy reading!</li>
</ul>

=head2 That One More Thing

This Christmas is the Christmas many in the Perl community have been waiting
for: The one where we get a whole new programming language!

Perl 6 is a sister language to Perl 5:  Rebuilt from scratch, with exciting
refined syntax and capabilities, Perl 6 is designed to appeal to the discerning
Perl programmer.  It's been under development for many years, but finally this
Christmas we're getting all our Christmases at once: The first major release!

You can find out more about Perl 6 over at L<perl6.org|http://perl6.org/.  Heck, they've
even got their own L<advent calendar|https://perl6advent.wordpress.com/>...

Until next year....Merry Christmas, one and all.
