=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 1

=for advent_title Episode 208

#Santa's Warnings, not XMas story as IMDB has it.

=for advent_author Jerrad Pierce

Thanks to recent lay-offs and the switch from toys to weapons of mass
destruction--more bang for your labor buck afterall--Santa's workforce
is down to a handful of Neptunians. To further demoralize his minions,
Santa has taken to designating his organic production units by letters,
rather than names. Worse still, a Neptunian's place in the alphabet
indicates the fat one's regard for his position. Little surprise then,
that the IT guy is letter Y, just above the robot reindeer exhaust port
scrubber.

Santa's a real ball-buster, and he forces Y to run code on a crufty old
VAX, with the environment variable I<PERL5OPT=-MY:Tools> to ensure that
Y adheres to his B&D coding standards. Doing so loads a subclass of
M<ToolSet>, a manipulative which abstracts the cutting and pasting of
frequently used code into a single statement.

Although it may not be clear from the example below, particularly since
so many of Santa's favorite modules act globally, M<ToolSet>'s export
method causes the specified modules to export into the caller's namespace.
i.e; things are loaded in your local M<ToolSet>, but the code C<use>-ing
M<ToolSet> has access to the loaded libraries' methods and procedures;
without fully-qualified names. That's pretty nifty but unfortunately,
as of 0.14, M<ToolSet> doesn't support things like C<no indirect>.

=sourcedcode mod1.pl

=cut
