=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 23

=for advent_title Resolution for next year: 1280x1024 or better

=for advent_author Yanick Champoux

The problem with New Year resolutions is that they are always so&hellip;
radical. It's always "I'll never do this again", or "from now on, I'll always
do that." No wonder everyone breaks them even before Boxing Day sales are
over: only saints can switch from indulgence to intransigence in the blink of
an eye.

Programmers are no exception. Undoubtedly, on New Year's you'll vow to up your
level of leetness, and perhaps make use of some of the widgets you've read
about here. In the new year, your code is going to be leaner, meaner and
better documented. It'll read like Tolstoy, and run like Seabiscuit. Oh yes,
from now on, it's going to be best practices all the way. The straight and
narrow is going to be your only path, and <tt>Perl::Critic</tt> is going to
be your shepherd.

And so, high on your new resolution, you'll rush to add
P<2005-12|Test::Perl::Critic> to our distribution's tests
(perhaps even with some custom rules)&hellip; and that's when the bubble
bursts &#x00a4; Your new-found enthusiasm is suddenly crushed. Your hopes for
a better life flattened. If you have a reasonably large and flabby suite of
scripts or modules, chances are with even the gentlest <tt>Perll::Critic</tt>
you'll wind up staring numbly at screens upon screens upon screens of
remonstrances and warnings. Surely, you'll think, there is no way I can fix
those thousands of violations. You'll sigh, remove the test, and resort to
eggnog dregs to soothe the pain.

It needn't be that way. The key to success is to realize that gradual
change is easier to achieve than a sudden overhaul. This is where
M<Test::Perl::Critic::Progressive> saves the day, and your self-esteem.

<tt>TPC::Progressive</tt> is meant to slowly ease a codebase into conformance.
Instead of enforcing an "all-or-nothing" approach, its test will pass as long
as the number of violations for the current run is less or equal than it was
on previous runs. That way, it can be added to a distribution without
automatically dooming it to a long-term stay in test failure purgatory. 

But, of course, your resolution is not to only keep your modules at their
current level of excellence, but rather to elevate them to perfection. No
problem: with some extra setting <tt>TPC::Progressive</tt> can require that,
to be successful, new test runs must knock out a minimum number of violations.
Thus the unmovable mountain is reduced into a pile of small, manageable
pebbles. A B<big> pile of pebbles, mind you. But then, that's why it's called
a B<New Year's> resolution, and not a B<new week's> resolution, isn't it?

=sourcedcode mod23.pl
