Author: Dave Cross <dave@perlhacks.com>
Title: GitHub Actions: A Festive Tale of DevOps Magic
Topic: GitHub Actions

=encoding utf8

It was a crisp December morning at the North Pole, and Pixie the Elf (whose
parents had weird ideas about names) was already hard at work in Santa’s
Workshop. Her job was critical: maintaining Santa’s Good/Bad Child Tracking
App, affectionately nicknamed "NaughtyOrNice". The app, a sprawling Perl
application, kept records on every child’s behaviour throughout the year.
But as Christmas drew nearer, the workload multiplied, and Pixie was feeling
the strain.

=head2 The Problem: Manual Testing Mayhem

For years, Pixie had been managing NaughtyOrNice with a mix of manual
testing, haphazard deployment scripts, and a good deal of holiday cheer. But
this year, the app had grown exponentially, with new features like
integration with Smart Chimney Sensors™ and support for multi-timezone
sleigh operations.

Every code change required hours of testing—on Pixie's local machine, of
course—followed by an error-prone manual deployment process. One too many
late-night debugging sessions left Pixie wondering if she was on Santa's
Naughty list herself.

"I need help," she muttered to herself during one particularly long debugging
session. She decided to take a break, grabbed a coffee from the machine and
started idly browsing r/elftech. Immediately, an article about GitHub Actions
caught her attention.

=head2 What Are GitHub Actions?

Pixie had vaguely heard of GitHub Actions before, but she’d always assumed
it was for the tech-savvy elves in charge of JavaScript or Rust projects.
The article made it seem that GitHub Actions were just as useful for Perl
developers, and that it could automate much of her workflow.

Intrigued, Pixie decided to dive in.

=head2 A First Workflow: Automating Tests

Pixie started with the basics: automating the test suite for NaughtyOrNice.
The app already had a robust set of tests written with Test::More, but running
them manually was tedious.

Pixie created her first GitHub Actions workflow file, .github/workflows/test.yml:

=begin code

    name: Perl Test Suite

    on:
      push:
        branches:
          - main
      pull_request:

    jobs:
      test:
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest

        steps:
        - name: Checkout code
          uses: actions/checkout@v3

        - name: Set up Perl
          uses: shogo82148/actions-setup-perl@v1
          with:
            perl-version: '5.40'

        - name: Install dependencies
          run: |
            cpanm --quiet --installdeps .

        - name: Run tests
          run: prove -lr t/

=end code

Pixie was impressed. With just a few lines of YAML, she could trigger her
tests automatically whenever someone pushed code to the main branch or opened
a pull request. No more manual testing! She could focus on writing code
instead of running it.

=head2 Adding Deployment: Automating the NaughtyOrNice Rollout

With her test suite humming along, Pixie turned her attention to deployments.
Previously, deploying the app involved copying files to the production
server with a combination of scp commands and festive hope.

She created another workflow file, .github/workflows/deploy.yml:

=begin code

    name: Deploy to Production

    on:
      workflow_dispatch:

    jobs:
      deploy:
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest

        steps:
        - name: Checkout code
          uses: actions/checkout@v3

        - name: Deploy to server
          env:
            RSYNC_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.RSYNC_PASSWORD }}
          run: |
            rsync -avz --delete ./ naughtyornice@production-server:/var/www/naughtyornice/

=end code

By adding a secret to the GitHub repository for her server credentials, Pixie
automated the entire deployment process. The C<workflow_dispatch> key in the
C<on> section of the workflow added a "Run" button to the "Actions" tab in the
GitHub repo, and just pressing that would deploy the application to the
production server. No more late nights. No more missed sleigh rides. Pixie
even dared to start dreaming about creating a Docker container for
NaughtyOrNice and deploying the application that way. The time she would save
would allow her to look into long-awaited improvements like that.

=head2 The Real Magic: Pre-Written Workflows

Pixie was excited. This was going to make her life much better in so many
ways, And then she remembered the main point of the article she had been
reading. A group of Perl programmers on GitHub had created a set of reusable
workflows. They were aimed at CPAN modules, but as the NaughtyOrNice codebase
followed all of the CPAN packaging conventions, she thought she could probably
use these workflows for her code.

Pixie read the instructions for using these workflows (they were online at
L<https://github.com/PerltoolsTeam/github_workflows/>) and, in a few minutes,
she had a new workflow which looked like this:

=begin code

    name: CI

    on:
      push:
        branches: [ main ]
      pull_request:
        branches: [ main ]
      workflow_dispatch:

    jobs:
      test:
        uses: PerlToolsTeam/github_workflows/.github/workflows/cpan-test.yml@main

      coverage:
        uses: PerlToolsTeam/github_workflows/.github/workflows/cpan-coverage.yml@main

      perlcritic:
        uses: PerlToolsTeam/github_workflows/.github/workflows/cpan-perlcritic.yml@main

      complexity:
        uses: PerlToolsTeam/github_workflows/.github/workflows/cpan-complexity.yml@main

=end code

Pixie was very happy. In a few lines of code, she had replaced and improved
on her existing manual processes. The application was now being tested
automatically on several versions of Perl and on Linux, Windows and MacOS. She
was also getting test coverage reports on L<Coveralls.io|https://coveralls.io/>.
But the things she was most excited by were the PerlCritic and Cyclomatic
Complexity reports. Both of these gave her a huge number of ideas for
improvements to the code. And now that the process was so much more efficient,
she might actually have time to implement some of them. Happily, she started
adding the suggestions into the NaugthyOrNice issue tracker.

=head2 The Result: A Smoother Christmas

On Christmas Eve, as Santa prepared for his big journey, he stopped by Pixie's
workstation.

"Pixie," Santa said with a twinkle in his eye, "thanks to your hard work, this
year the app is the best it's ever been. You’ve truly outdone yourself."

Pixie blushed. "It wasn’t just me, Santa. I had help—from GitHub Actions!"

=head2 Your Own Holiday Automation

Pixie's story shows that even the busiest developers can save time and reduce
stress with GitHub Actions. Whether you're maintaining a legacy Perl app or
building a shiny new one, these workflows can simplify your life.

To get started, check out the pre-written workflows at
L<https://github.com/PerltoolsTeam/github_workflows/>. Who knows? They might
just bring a little magic to your own development process.

Happy holidays, and happy automating!

=cut
