Author: tim.potapov+advent@gmail.com
Title: Programming like a BEAST
Topic: e

=encoding utf8

L<https://metacpan.org/pod/e>

=head1 Enhance Your Development Workflow with the e Module:

You know how certain aspects of development can be
a real drag - slow and pretty boring?
I’ve definitely been there. But here’s where the e
module comes in and changes the game.

=head1 Rapid Prototyping:

The e module comes loaded in with many features
that can aid in rapid prototyping as well as testing.

=head2 Let's Make Selenium Testing Less Painfully Again:

One of its cool features is the C<repl> breakpoint
command, which can seriously simplify debugging and
testing processes across the board.

It can also be used from the command line like this:

=begin perl

    perl -Me -e 'my $var = 111; repl'

=end perl

With that simple one-liner, you trigger an
interactive breakpoint which pauses the execution
of the program and allows you to investigate data
and try things out. Once satisfied, you can quit
the debugger and code flow would continue as usual.

So, instead of dealing with all the usual hassle
of setting "breakpoints" and debugging manually
(yes, I taking about you C<print>), you can use
C<e> to just pop in a breakpoint whenever you
need it. This means you can pause execution,
check out what’s going on, and make adjustments
on the fly. It makes the whole debugging experience
a lot more interactive and, dare I say, even
somewhat enjoyable.

A prime example of where C<e> shines is in
Selenium testing, where it can significantly
ease the process. Selenium tests can be
notoriously slow and cumbersome, but its
C<repl> breakpoint feature makes it less painful.
However, it’s not just for Selenium, C<e> can
enhance various development tasks by making
debugging and testing more efficient (C<time =~ /money/>).

=head2 Performance Efficiency:

Worried about performance? Well, stop it!
C<e> has been optimized to have a very tiny
footprint to conserve space and resources.
Also, it makes great use of Just In Time (JIT)
module loading: only what you'd use would be
loaded in. For instance, I use it on my
smartphone with Termux, and it’s incredibly
fast - even with the phone's limited resources.
The impact is practically negligible, and it
runs smoothly without any noticeable delays.

=head2 User Testimonials:

[Placeholder for user testimonials section]

=head2 Interactive Demos:

To see C<e> in action, check out the Perl Banjo
interactive demo. You can run a few example
snippets and experiment with them directly.

Here’s a link to the demo: [Insert Link Here].
(Feel free to modify the snippets to explore
different features and see how C<e> can enhance
your own development workflow.)

---


=head2 Making links

Your article here goes here. The title will automatically be added by the site
builder. Make links with L<anchor text|http://example.com>. For module links,
merely specify the module, like L<Pod::Simple>.

=head2 Inline code

Make literal code text like this: C<$x>. If the code has angle brackets,
double up the angle brackets with extra space before and after, like this
C<< $obj->method >>..

=head2 Block code

There are regular Pod code verbatim text, which are indented lines:

    my $x = 1_00_000 ** $::xyzzy;

A C<perl> section can do syntax highlighting

=begin perl

    # inside "perl" blocks, make syntax-highlighted code
    # with Pod::Elemental::Transformer::SynHi
    my $x = 1_00_000 ** $::xyzzy;

=end perl

A C<code> section can syntax-highlight non-Perl too:

=begin code

  # inside "code" blocks, make syntax-highlighted code
  # with Pod::Elemental::Transformer::Codebox

=cut
