Title: Find My Santa
Topic: WebService::FindMyiPhone
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

From the look on the young elf's face running towords him, the Wise Old Elf
knew something had gone terribly terribly wrong.

"It's our worse nightmare, Sir" Private Jingle McCandySticks reported.  "We
just found a letter for Santa down the back of the Sofa in the mailroom, Sir!".

This was bad news indeed.  Santa had already set off on his annual round the
world present giving extravaganza, and if no-one had read that letter yet,
someone was going to have an empty stocking come Christmas morning.

"That's okay CandySticks", the wise old elf reassured the Private, taking the
letter as he did so. "Santa has his iPhone on him, it's freshly charged, so
one phone call and we'll be sure that ... let's see here ... little José Castro
will get the ninja costume he always wanted."

"But that's just it, Sir.  Ever since Lieutenant Pudding Von Snowflake
accidentally dialed Santa's cell phone instead of the Pizza place his phone is
on strict Do Not Disturb.  It won't even ring for Mrs. Claus, Sir!"

"Ah yes," sighed the Wise Old Elf, "well we can't blame him about that.  Not
after his Rockin' Around The Christmas Tree ringtone woke up those Rottweilers.
Still, don't worry, I think I can solve this with a little Perl script..."

  #!perl
  # access Santa's Where's My iPhone account with his iCloud credentials
  # and get access to his iPhone's details
  use WebService::FindMyiPhone;
  my $icloud = WebService::FindMyiPhone->new(
      username => 'kriskringle@icloud.com',
      password => 'RudyGuideMySleigh2Nite!',
  );
  my $iphone = $icloud->get_device_by( name => "Santa's iPhone" );

  # wait for Santa to fly west out of Portugal towards the Americas, so we know
  # that he's in the air and when we make his phone make noise, and it won't
  # wake anyone up
  while (1) {
    last if $iphone->location->{longitude} < -9.6;
    sleep 60 * 5;
  }

  # make his phone bleep until he acknowledges the emergency message
  $iphone->send_message(
    1,  # true = make noise
    "Go back, J.Casto (#F8034672F5DC4E4B965A7F0C1D0FD2AC) needs Ninja Costume",
  );

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<WebService::FindMyiPhone>
