Title: Got Git? Ask Santa to get Got!
Topic: App::GitGot
Author: John SJ Anderson <genehack@genehack.org>

=encoding utf8

=head2 Many Git Repos Can Get Messy

Like most developers, I've got a I<lot> of source code in Git repositories,
scattered and duplicated across the four-odd machines I use on a regular basis
(the laptop, the server, the other laptop, the VPS...) It's actually worse than
that, because it's not just source code — I've got various configuration files
in different repositories, a couple repositories that just contain documents,
and so on. I keep everything in sync and configured the same across all my
machines by depending on these repositories to be reasonably up-to-date with
the master copy (which is some times at Github, some times on $WORK's repo
server, some times on one of my servers...)

In order to effectively manage the all these git repositories, from all those
different locations, across all those machines, I use
L<got|https://metacpan.org/pod/App::GitGot>. C<got> is a utility that makes it
trivial to run various C<git> commands across some or all of the repositories
that C<got> knows about.

=head2 Get GitGot

Before you can use C<got>, you need to install it. Luckily, it's on CPAN, in
the L<App::GitGot> dist. Fire up your favorite CPAN client and install that,
and once all the dependencies install, you should have a shiny new C<got>
command available to you. Much like C<git>, C<got> works via a series of
sub-commands — if you just run C<got>, you'll get a list of all the available
sub-commands.

=head2 Gotta tell got where your git repos are

In order for C<got> to manage your repositories, you'll have to add them to the
configuration file. (By default, this lives at C<~/.gitgot>.) One way to add a
repo is the C<got add> command — C<cd> into the repo you want to add, and run
C<got add>. You'll be prompted for a few pieces of info — the defaults are
generally correct — and then the repository will be added to the config file.

    % got add
    Name: etc
     URL: git@github.com:genehack/etc.git
    Path: /Users/genehack/etc
    Tags: config

Note the "Tags" entry — as we'll see shortly, tags are one way you can select
repositories to operate on.

If you want to just accept the defaults without having a chance to edit them,
you can run C<got add -D>, which will just accept the default options.
Currently, there isn't any command to edit a repository after it has been added
(to add or change tags, for example), but the configuration file is a very
simple YAML file which is trivial to hand-edit.

There are a couple of other sub-commands that add repositories to your config
file. C<got clone $CLONE_URL> will run C<git clone> on the given URL, and then
add the resulting repository checkout to your C<got> config. Similarly, C<got
fork $GITHUB_URL> will fork the given Github repo, then clone the resulting
fork, and finally add it to your C<got> config. The C<got fork> sub-command
depends on having a properly configured C<~/.github-identity> file with your
Github authentication information.

=head2 Got Gets Your Git Repos In Line

Once you've added some git repositories to your C<got> config file, you can use
C<got> to carry out various batch operations. For example, you can show all the
repositories C<got> is aware of with the C<got list> (aka C<got ls>)
sub-command. You can also specify a subset of repositories to operate on by
providing additional arguments. For example, given this output:

  % got ls
    1) Perl-Build      git   git://github.com/tokuhirom/Perl-Build
    2) STAMPS          git   git@github.com:genehack/STAMPS.git
    3) app-gitgitr     git   git@github.com:genehack/app-gitgitr.git
    4) app-gitgot      git   git@github.com:genehack/app-gitgot.git
    5) app-miseenplace git   git@github.com:genehack/app-miseenplace.git
    6) build-color     git   git@github.com:genehack/build-color.git
    7) dosetool        git   genehack.net:/var/git/private/dosetool
    8) emacs           git   git@github.com:genehack/emacs.git
    9) etc             git   git@github.com:genehack/etc.git

You can specify one or more repository index numbers, or number ranges, to only
select certain repos. For example:

  % got ls 2 4-6 7 9
    2) STAMPS           git   git@github.com:genehack/STAMPSOB.git
    4) app-gitgot       git   git@github.com:genehack/app-gitgot.git
    5) app-miseenplace  git   git@github.com:genehack/app-miseenplace.git
    6) build-color      git   git@github.com:genehack/build-color.git
    7) dosetool         git   genehack.net:/var/git/private/dosetool
    9) etc              git   git@github.com:genehack/etc.git

You can also specify tags with the C<-t> flag:

  % got ls -t config
    5) app-miseenplace  git   git@github.com:genehack/app-miseenplace.git
    8) emacs            git   git@github.com:genehack/emacs.git
    9) etc              git   git@github.com:genehack/etc.git

Multiple C<-t> options may be given, in which case they are combined in a
"logical OR" fashion.

Finally, you can specify repos by name:

  % got ls emacs
    8) emacs  git   git@github.com:genehack/emacs.git

This ability to select a subset of repositories to operate on applies not just to the C<got ls> subcommand, but to any C<got> subcommand that operates on multiple repositories, such as C<got gc>, C<got status>, or C<got update>.

=head2 Gotta Get It Together Now

As I mentioned above, I depend on a number of git repositories being kept up to
date with the master copy in order to propagate configuration changes across
machines and to maintain consistency in how things are configured. I do this by
frequently (at least once a week, if not more often), using a combination of
C<got update_status> and C<got status> to first update all the repositories on
a given machine, then display repositories that have either uncommitted changes
or changes that have been locally committed but not pushed up to the master. By
using these two commands and iterating across all my active machines, it
becomes trivial to make sure everything is up to date.

B<Note:> The C<update_status>, C<update>, and C<status> commands all take an
optional C<-q> (for quiet) flag. This hides the output from repositories that
don't have anything "interesting" to show — all the unchanged repos, all the
clean repos that are in sync with the remote, etc. Also worth noting is that
the C<update> command does a C<git pull>. There's an outstanding request for a
C<git fetch> command, which is waiting on me to have a spare tuit, or some
brave volunteer to send in a pull request.

=head2 But Wait, We Got More

C<got> also has a number of commands that are designed to make it easier to
work with individual repositories without needing to know exactly where they
live on disk. The C<got chdir REPO> command spawns a new subshell inside the
given repository, and the C<got tmux REPO> subcommand (contributed by Yanick
Champoux) spawns a new C<tmux> window with the working directory inside the
given repository. The repository's name will be used as the name of the C<tmux>
window. If the window has already been created by a previous invocation of
C<got tmux>, instead of creating a new window, the existing window will be
selected.

If you're curious whether a given repository is being managed by C<got>, you
can use the C<got this> command (contributed by Yanick Champoux) while inside
the repository. If it is managed by C<got>, you'll get back the listing output
for the repo. If it is not managed by C<got>, you'll see a message to that
effect.

=head2 What You Got?

At this point, C<got> is a very good fit for my personal workflow around git
repositories across multiple machines. I realize, however, that my workflow is
not everybody's workflow, and I'm very open to additional commands or command
flags being added to make C<got> more generically useful to more people. C<got>
was also originally intended to be a VCS-agnostic tool; it just so happened
that around the time I got the first usable version of it completed, my need to
use anything other than C<git> for revision control evaporated. The extension
hooks for other VCSen are still in place, however, and I would love to merge
code that adds SVN, Hg, or even CVS support.

Please fork the L<repository|http://github.com/genehack/app-gitgot/> on Github,
add your own contribution, and send in a pull request!

=head2 Acknowledgments

C<got> was originally very heavily inspired by a similar tool, developed by
Ingy döt Net, called L<App::AYCABTU|https://metacpan.org/pod/App::AYCABTU>. In
particular, the repository selection interface and large chunks of the config
file were shamelessly pilfered. C<got> has also been greatly improved by the
efforts of Yanick Champoux, Mike Greb, and Chris Prather, as well as everybody
who has reported a bug or wishlist feature.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<App::GitGot>
