Title: Bashing Perl5
Topic: hub, bash
Author: Ingy Döt Net <ingy@ingy.net>

=encoding utf8

In the past 6 months, I've worked on a lot of
L<things|https://github.com/ingydotnet> in a lot of
L<languages|https://github.com/acmeism/RosettaCodeData>. Being an
L<Acmeist|http://acmeism.org>, this shouldn't seem suspect. What I<may> come as
a surprise, is that my main go-to programming language during this time has
been B<Bash>! L<Bash|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_%28Unix_shell%29>? Is
that even a programming language?

=head1 Bashing Ingy

Let me introduce you to my favorite new tool:
L<git-hub|https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-hub>. Install this tool and now you
can do all your day-to-day L<GitHub|https://github.com> interaction using
C<git> commands.

Who is L<Ingy döt Net|http://ingy.net> anyway?

    $ git hub user ingydotnet

Who cares?

    $ git hub followers ingydotnet

What good is he?

    $ git hub repos ingydotnet

I'm confused…

    $ git hub help

OK, tell me about the git-hub repo?

    $ git hub repo ingydotnet/git-hub

Fork that Bash stuff!

    $ git hub fork ingydotnet/git-hub

Clone me down, Scotty!

    $ git hub clone git-hub  # your fork

Hmmm, I like git-hub!

    $ git hub star ingydotnet/git-hub

The git-hub command is even chainable. Want to follow all the members of the
C<perl6> GitHub organization, and star all their repos?

    $ git hub members perl6 --all --raw | git hub follow -
    $ git hub repos perl6 -ar | git hub star -

With the C<--raw> flag, git-hub prints just the userid or repo-spec, then the
'-' flag tells the command to read each line of STDIN and replace the '-' with
it. Voilà!

This is just a glimpse of the GitHub things you can do. Give it a spin.

=head1 WTB? (What/Why The Bash?)

This amazingly simple/powerful git command is written in Bash. If you are
familiar with how Git works, you know that it's basically a huge collection of
subcommand plugins with names like C<git-clone>. Try running this command:

    $ ls `git --exec-path`

You should see well over 100 commands. They can be written in any language. In
fact, in the early days they were mostly written in Perl5! As Git became more
popular, much of the Perl was ported to C. You'll notice that most of those
files are symlinks to the C<git> executable. This means that while C<git-clone>
is written in C, you could simply replace that symlink with a Haskell program
of your own crafting.

In May 2013, I became interested in a replacement for git-submodule, called
L<git-subtree|https://github.com/apenwarr/git-subtree>, but soon noticed it had
lots of problems too, so I started writing
L<git-subrepo|https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-subrepo>. The subtree command
was written in Bash, so I started writing the subrepo command in Bash. I put
the subrepo command on hold and started working on the C<git-hub> project. For
fun, I decided to see if it was possible to write it in Bash (since I could
easy revert to Perl5 if it wasn't).

Was it? It was!

When I try out a new programming language, I generally just think in terms of
my favorite programming idioms, rather than language specific idioms. When I
get stuck writing something, I google the idiom and read the (almost always
StackOverflow) explanation. It starts off slow, but fairly soon I'm getting
stuff working, and eventually I feel like a
L<Rock Star|http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ>.

With Bash, every idiom I needed was there, albeit often in a ridiculous
syntactic form, compared to Perl5 (or its hipster cousin Ruby).

=head1 The Good, The Bad, and the WTF!

Let's look at some
L<Modern Bash|https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-hub/blob/perl5-advent-2013/lib/git-hub#L164>.
This is the part of the C<git-hub> code where the subcommands are written. For
example, here's the 2 functions for the C<git hub user> command:

    #!vim sh
    command:user() {
      get-args ?user:get-user
      api-get "/users/$user"
      msg_404="User '$user' not found."
    }

    ok:user() {
      fields=(
        login type name email blog location company bio
        followers following public_repos public_gists
      )
      report-data
    }

Quite often when people see this code for the first time they don't believe
it's plain old Bash. Well, it is! (And it isn't!). The code above has been
heavily refactored, with some Ingy DSL sprinkled on top. Let's review this
snippet:

This is the definition of 2 functions. The C<:> is just part of the function
name. Bash is quite liberal on function name characters, while quite strict on
variable names. Since Bash lacks any concept of hierarchical namespacing, the
C<:> lets us fake it nicely. The C<()> parens are required but useless (ie
nothing ever goes inside them).

The C<get-args> is just another internal function. I've been using '-' instead
of '_' because, you know, it feels more modern. Note that the argument has no
quotes. Being a lover of L<YAML|http://yaml.org>, I avoid quotes when I can. In
Bash, commands go through a process called Parameter Expansion, in which
whitespace is King. I only use quotes when a string has variable interpolation
I<and> the variable in question might have whitespace that would mess up the
expansion.

The C<fields=(…)> is how you initialize an array. It's so elegant, and yet this
elegance is a Bash rarity. Here's another sexy idiom:

    #!vim sh
    fields+=(foo bar)   # push 2 elements onto an array variable

What if we wanted to print the contents of the array or its size?

    #!vim sh
    echo $fields       # Nope. Only prints 'login'.
    echo ${fields[@]}  # Correct (and ugly)
    echo ${#fields[@]} # Print the array size (so obvious, right?)

As you can see, the Ugly is never far away. What if we want to join the array
into a string where the elements are separated by a C<:>?

    #!vim sh
    printf -v string "$(IFS=':'; eval echo "\"${fields[*]}\"")"
    echo $string

WTF?!

=head1 Which Advent Calendar is this anyway?

You ♥ Perl5. Why is Ingy Bashing you? (tis the season to be Merry!!!)

As I swam through the enigmatic waters of Bash, it became very apparent to me,
where Perl got its roots. There was a consistent string of Aha! moments, where
I would see where Larry got his inspirations and then cranked them each up to
11.

A friend pointed out to me that he read somewhere, that Perl was originally an
attempt to do Shell programming in a single process. This was after I noticed
that the simple C<git hub user> command spawned ~200 subprocesses! I guess
subprocesses are cheaper now than in the 80s.

Which reminds me, I only realized yesterday that Bash 1.0 was released 2 years
I<after> Perl 1.0. Bash is the L<FSF's|http://www.fsf.org/> I<free> offering of
the Bourne shell (from which all the great Unix shells descended). It turns out
that Bash got more ideas from Perl than the reverse. Perl 1.0 only had sh, csh
and ksh to start from.

I have a book's worth of interesting Perl5↔Bash stuff to tell you. Maybe I
should write one.

=head1 Bash Into the Future

Why is Bash of interest as a programming language? Well for one, it's fairly
ubiquitous. This lets you write things that will cause the least pain for the
most general audience. But the same can be said of Perl5. It seems to be
installed by default as much as Bash.

Well, there's a couple things that Shell is way better at than Perl/Ruby/Python
etc: IPC and system interaction. These things are so naturally ingrained into
Shell, that they often go unnoticed, and they make Shell a much more natural
language for writing more Shell commands, UNTIL… you need a B<module> like, say
JSON or YAML.

The real problem with programming in Bash is there's no CPAN. Fortunately
that's a solvable problem! Just a simple matter of programming. I realized
early into git-hub development that I needed a complete JSON parser. Not only
that, Bash has no data structures to parse JSON into. I solved both problems by
writing L<json-bash|https://github.com/ingydotnet/json-bash>. I also needed to
write tests. Check out
L<test-more-bash|https://github.com/ingydotnet/test-more-bash>. All these
obscure idioms could be packaged into a nice DSL, to make Bash hacking more
accessible. Introducing L<Bash+|https://github.com/ingydotnet/bashplus>.

Hmm… This is turning into a nice little collection. Hmm… Where to host all
these modules, and start the Bash revolution? I've owned the domain L<bpan.org>
for many years now. Hmm… stay tuned!!!

=head1 Wrapping it Up

The range of influence that Perl5 has had on modern computing is vast. Bash is
a great language to simultaneously see Perl's roots and its contributions in
one place. I encourage you to dive into other programming languages, and swim
around. If you're like me, it will grow your love for Perl. You'll have parts
of Perl culture to grace on other communities, and you'll find things to bring
back home. Because if you are really like me, you call Perl your family.

Merry Christmas :-♥
