Title: The Emergency Debugger
Topic: Devel::cst
Author: Leon Timmermans <fawaka@gmail.com>

=head1 Devel::cst, the emergency debugger

Imagine, some long running background job crashes with a segfault. What
happens? Well, very little. It died without leaving the faintest
explanation why. With a little bad luck, you're not even noticing it died,
and a month later you see that your data is incomplete in some horrible way.

This is why you should run such programs with what I like to call an
emergency debugger. This means that you will always get at least a
stacktrace on any serious fault. Something like this:

 Segmentation fault (Address not mapped to object [0x1])
 /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6(+0x14e780)[0x7f944d90b780]
 perl(Perl_sv_setpvn+0xb1)[0x511191]
 perl(Perl_newSVpvn_flags+0x6c)[0x514b4c]
 perl[0x5e8bec]
 perl(Perl_unpackstring+0x112)[0x5f4012]
 perl(Perl_pp_unpack+0x12a)[0x5f425a]
 perl(Perl_runops_debug+0x48)[0x4b1688]
 perl(perl_run+0x64e)[0x4423be]
 perl(main+0x137)[0x41b207]
 /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6(__libc_start_main+0xf5)[0x7f944d7deea5]
 perl[0x41b241]

Reading such a stack trace can be a bit of a black art, but even to the
untrained eye it's obvious it crashed and burned. Importantly, this will
end up in your error logs, so you can actually easily see that it crashed
and burned.

To a more trained eye it will tell that you dereferenced a null pointer in
L<unpack|http://perldoc.perl.org/functions/unpack.html>.  I guess
L<Acme::Boom|https://metacpan.org/pod/Acme::Boom> is a bit of a naughty
module after all ;-). In other situations it could tell you for example
that a specific XS module is being buggy. It's capable of handling tricky
corner cases such as stack overflows (the signal handler needs a stack to
run on, but during a stack overflow you really don't have any stack left…)
and repeated faults (it won't go into an infinite recursion).

Now obviously this is usually only the start of fixing the bug, but you
can't run your entire production platform under gdb. You can easily run
this debugger on any production platform. Just add C<-d:cst> to your perl
invocation, e.g. C<perl -d:cst -MAcme::Boom -e0>. It has no CPU overhead
and minimal memory overhead. It's a tiny thing in the background that goes
by unnoticed until the worst happens. It does not require any external
tools, though it currently only works on Linux (I'm hoping to add support
for BSD/darwin soon). If you're really adventurous you could even add
C<-d:cst> to your PERL5OPT environmental variable and have all your perl
programs use this automatically (but be sure to have it installed properly
first).

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Devel::cst>
