Title: So long and thanks for all the hits!
Topic: Perl Advent 2013
Author: Ricardo Signes <rjbs@cpan.org>

Advent is over, and so this year's Perl Advent Calendar has come to an end.  I
hope everyone has enjoyed this year's articles and is looking forward to more
in a mere 341 days!  If you'd like to contribute an article for next year,
you've got plenty of time to get started!

As always, the Perl Advent Calendar was a group effort, and I'd like to thank
everyone who contributed this year: Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt, David Golden,
Ingy Döt Net, John SJ Anderson, Karen Etheridge, Leon Timmermans, Mark Allen,
Mark Fowler, Mark Jason Dominus, Matthew Horsfall, Neil Bowers, Ricardo Signes,
Sawyer X, Toby Inkster, and Yanick Champoux.

If you want to help with the site or other things in the meantime, you can
L<join our mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent> where
we'll be talking about work that needs to get done on things like the FAQ, the
site generator, and all that sort of thing.  You can find the L<site's contents
on GitHub|https://github.com/rjbs/Perl-Advent>, which I<should> contain the
2013 articles by the time you see this.  It's not exactly how it should be, but
it's there.

More importantly, you can find L<our wish list for fixes and
features|https://github.com/rjbs/Perl-Advent/issues>.  Help with these and you
will earn fame forever (at least in the git logs)!

Whether or not we hear from you between now and then, we look forward to
publishing again next year.  Merry Christmas, Happy New Year, and Happy
Hacking!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<the project issue tracker|https://github.com/rjbs/Perl-Advent>
* L<the git repository|https://github.com/rjbs/Perl-Advent>
* L<the mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent>
* L<the someday-to-be-rewritten FAQ|http://www.perladvent.org/FAQ.html>
