Title: Dancer Goes Megasplat
Topic: Dancer's Metasplat
Author: Yanick Champoux <yanick@cpan.org>

No, Santa Claus' sleigh just didn't have the mother of all reindeer-benders.
This article is rather about the little-known but very useful feature of
L<Dancer> known as the megasplat.

So, what's the megasplat? Well, C<Dancer>, being heavily influenced by Ruby's
L<Sinatra|http://www.sinatrarb.com/>, adopted its I<splat> placeholder, which
allows to capture elements of a route:

  #!perl
  use Dancer;

  get '/wishlist/*' => sub {
      my( $child ) = splat;

      return NortPole::DB->get_wishlist( $child );
  };

That route will match F</wishlist/timmy>, and F</wishlist/sandy>, and
the wishlist of every other child in the world, but what if we want to match
several path elements? That's where we go mega:

  #!perl
  use Dancer;

  get '/giddy_up/**' => sub {
      my( $reindeers ) = splat;

      my @exclamations = (
          'Now', 'On', 'To the top of the porch', 'To the top of the wall'
      );

      return join '', map {
          sprintf "%s, %s!\n",
                  $exclamations[rand @exclamations], $_
      } @$reindeers;
  };

  dance;

With that, we can hit F</giddy_up/Prancer/Dancer/Vixen/Cupid> and get back:

  Now, Prancer!
  To the top of the porch, Dancer!
  To the top of the wall, Vixen!
  On, Cupid!

Besides that, the megasplat can also be used to mimick L<Catalyst>'s chaining
behavior:

  #!perl
  use 5.10.0;

  use Dancer;

  my( @naughty, @nice, %gift, $child );

  any '/child/*/**' => sub {
      ($child) = splat;
      pass;
  };

  prefix = '/child/*';

  get '/naughty' => sub { push @naugthy, $child; 'tsk tsk'     };
  get '/nice'    => sub { push @nice, $child;    'nicely done' };

  put '/gift/*' =>  sub { $gift{$child} = (splat)[1] };

  get '/gift' => sub { $child ~~ $naughty ? 'coal' : $gift{$child} };

  dance;

Which will give Santa a nice little basic web service for his I<Nice &
Naughty> book keeping:

  $ curl http://api.toydb.np/child/rjbs/nice
  nicely done
  $ curl http://api.toydb.np/child/yanick/naughty
  tsk tsk
  $ curl -X PUT http://api.toydb.np/child/rjbs/gift/pony
  noted
  $ curl -X PUT http://api.toydb.np/child/yanick/gift/pony
  noted
  $ curl http://api.toydb.np/child/yanick/gift
  coal
  $ curl http://api.toydb.np/child/rjbs/gift
  pony

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Dancer>
* L<Sinatra|http://www.sinatrarb.com/>
