Title: Swarm your webserver
Topic: App::Legion
Author: Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt <frew@cpan.org>

"My name is Legion, for we are many."¹

App::Legion is a tool for loading up your server(s) and seeing how well the
load is handled.  It is specifically written for static content served to many
clients.  Obviously you I<could> use it for dynamic content, and if you are pro
enough to serve dynamic content to thousands of concurrent requests I tip my
hat to you.

The special feature that Legion brings to the table is that it can use
multiple computers as clients concurrently.  If you have F<ssh> access to a
unix machine it is likely that it can work as a Legion client with little work
on your end.  There are three things that are required for Legion to use a
server as a client:

=for :list
= ssh access
ssh is how Legion connects to clients and ships code and data over the wire
= perl
Perl must be installed on the unix machine that is slated to be a client for
Legion to run
= ab
This is probably the only requirement that a typical unix box doesn't already
meet.  F<ab> is the "apache bench" tool that comes from the F<apache2-utils>
package in debian based systems.  (Eventually I'd like to support F<wrk>, but
I'd like to wait until it is prepackaged for major distributions before
supporting it.)

=head2 Example

  #!perl
  use App::Legion;
  use Devel::Dwarn;

  my $stats = App::Legion->new(
     server_host  => 'test-server-1,
     client_hosts => ['frew@client1', 'frew@client2'],
     concurrency  => 100,
     requests     => 5_000,
     urls         => [qw(
        /css.css
        /js.js
        /sound/cache/123.wav
        /static/cache/123.html
     )],
  )->run;

  DwarnF { "rps per url: $_[0]" } $stats->requests_per_second_by_url;

The above will fire up clients on the hosts client1 and client2, hit four
distinct urls at a concurrency of 100 I<each>, totalling to a concurrency of
about 800 against the server.  Obviously numbers need to be tweaked for your
usecase.

The object returned from C<run> contains all of the information measured by
each C<ab> instance.  There are a few methods that you can use to query it, but
as I suspect that I don't know what all people want to know, I decided to just
store the information in a SQLite database that can easily be queried against
to do more complicated reporting.  If you are a fan of L<DBIx::Class> you can
use that to query the db:

  #!perl
  +{
     map { $_->{url} => $_->{tpr} }
     $self->_schema->resultset('Measurement')->search(undef, {
        columns => {
           tpr => { avg => 'time_per_request' },
           url => 'url.url',
        },
        join => [qw(url)],
        group_by => [qw(url.url)],
        result_class => 'DBIx::Class::ResultClass::HashRefInflator',
     })->all
  }

or if you prefer to just use raw sql, that's obviously fine too:

  #!perl
  $stats->dbh->selectrow_hashref(<<'SQL')

  FROM "measurements" "me"
  JOIN "urls" "url" ON "me"."url_id" = "url"."id"
  GROUP BY "url"."url"
  SQL

The structure of the schema can be seen L<here|App::Legion::Schema>.

=head2 Guts

I think that how Legion works is pretty interesting.  Basically it's just the
glue between two technologies: C<ab> and L<Object::Remote>.  C<ab> is not super
exciting but it certainly can hit servers harder than I could with pure Perl.
L<Object::Remote>, on the other hand, is a much more interesting beast.

L<Object::Remote> is a tool that allows you to write Perl (explicitly pure Perl,
which means Moose, DBI, and many other cpan modules are not allowed) objects and
run them elsewhere.  It's not quite bulletproof yet, but for the most part it
has worked for me.

It has a fairly in depth logging system; the ability to run remote code (what
this module uses), local code (forks instead of remote connections), and local
superuser code.  It could use more documentation, but I'm sure the authors
would be willing to take patches for that.

=head2 Next Steps

Because L<Object::Remote> gives us this incredibly useful ability to run code on
servers with basically no configuration (everything has ssh and perl, right?)
there are some really handy ideas that can come in the future.  I would like to
refactor Legion to be a wrapper around a generic
L<MapReduce|http://research.google.com/archive/mapreduce.html> library.

=head2 A Warning

Due to the nature of what Legion is and the tools it leverages, it is far from
perfect.  It is perfectly suited to loading up a web server and seeing how the
web server holds up.  On the other hand, if you were to use it as some kind of
core tech in your application I would say you should either hold off and wait or
work with L<Shadowcat|http://shadow.cat/> to improve L<Object::Remote>.  On top
of that, C<ab> sometimes gives up and crashes earlier than I'd rather, but
there is little I can do about that aside from increasing timeouts and whatnot.

=head1 Footnotes

=for :list
1 Bible quotes are Christmassy, right? — Ed.
