Title: Web done better!
Topic: PSGI/Plack
Author: Sawyer X <xsawyerx@cpan.org>

=head1 Remembering the horror

If you've done any web programming in Perl for more than a few years, you
probably know how difficult and annoying server-side web programming can be.
If you're new, just hold on to your hat for a few minutes.

=head1 So you want to write a server-side web application?

Welcome! How would you like to write your web application? Do you want to use
L<CGI.pm|CGI>, B<mod_perl>, L<FCGI>, L<Catalyst>, L<Jifty>? Maybe you want to
write it yourself manually? Each form means a different output. Each
server (Apache, Lighttpd, Nginx, etc.) supports some technologies but not
others, and requires data in a different format.

You're probably beginning to see the problem. In web programming you're
basically marrying yourself to a specific server environment. Beyond
that, each framework usually settles on a specific server environment protocol,
whether it is CGI or mod_perl. Then, if the web server doesn't work, or if
you want to move to a different protocol, your web application needs rewriting.
Yay! Oh wait, no. That sucks.

=head1 Great artists are inspired

Picasso said that I<good artists copy, great artists steal>, but a better
paraphrase might be that great artists I<are inspired>. As such, Perl superhero
Tatsuhiko Miyagawa was inspired by specifications available in other languages
(Ruby's L<Rack|http://rack.github.com/>, Python's
L<WSGI|http://wsgi.readthedocs.org/en/latest/>) that provide an interface layer
between different server environment protocols.  He created Perl's L<PSGI>.

PSGI finally provides a clear specification for interfacing with different
layers. This effectively separates between the web application, the interface
(L<HTTP::Engine>, CGI, FCGI), and the web server (Apache, Nginx,
L<HTTP::Server::Simple>), which up until now were mashed together like a
an awful software train wreck.

Do you want to write your application in L<Catalyst>? Maybe in L<Web::Simple>?
As long as they support the PSGI protocol, you can do that. Now you can deploy
them on any web server, use any technology (whether it's CGI, FastCGI, or
anything else), and even run them on Perl-based web servers as a backend
to a reverse-proxy server (Nginx, Apache + mod_proxy, and so on).

PSGI comes with a reference implementation called L<Plack>, which includes a
range of utilities, and implementations for servers (under the Plack::Server
namespace).

=head1 Welcome to a Modern Perl web

All modern Perl web frameworks now support the PSGI protocol (L<Catalyst>,
L<Dancer>, L<Web::Simple>, L<Mojolicious>, L<Mason>, L<OX>, L<Tatsumaki>, and
more), and you can deploy on any web server, including Perl web servers
(L<Starman>, L<Starlet>, L<Twiggy>, L<Corona>).

PSGI also specifies different layers of action called I<middleware>, allowing
you to add blocks on top of your web application providing a range of services,
such as caching, privacy and authorization control, REPL, debugging screens,
session management and more.

=head1 Words are Cheap

To anyone with an appetite for understanding, this is probably not enough.
Seeing is believing, isn't it? What does a PSGI app really look like?

In essence, a PSGI application is just a code reference:

    #!perl
    my $app = sub {
        # your application
    };

That reference is then sent to the server. For every new HTTP request, the
server will call the code reference and send it the environment variables of
the request in a hash structure, conventionally called C<$env>.

    #!perl
    $env = {
       HTTP_ACCEPT            => "*/*",
       HTTP_HOST              => "localhost:5000",
       HTTP_USER_AGENT        => "curl/7.27.0",
       PATH_INFO              => "/",
       psgi.errors            => *main::STDERR,
       psgi.input             => *HTTP::Server::PSGI::input,
       psgi.multiprocess      => "",
       psgi.multithread       => "",
       psgi.nonblocking       => "",
       psgi.run_once          => "",
       psgi.streaming         => 1,
       psgi.url_scheme        => "http",
       psgi.version           => [ 1, 1 ],
       psgix.harakiri         => 1,
       psgix.input.buffered   => 1,
       psgix.io               => *Symbol::GEN1,
       QUERY_STRING           => "",
       REMOTE_ADDR            => "127.0.0.1",
       REMOTE_PORT            => 37063,
       REQUEST_METHOD         => "GET",
       REQUEST_URI            => "/",
       SCRIPT_NAME            => "",
       SERVER_NAME            => 0,
       SERVER_PORT            => 5000,
       SERVER_PROTOCOL        => "HTTP/1.1"
    };

You can use this environment hash to understand the request. Alternatively
you could use one of the available PSGI-supported web frameworks. They
abstract the code that handled these environment variables and allows you to
define code paths for your web application.

Next comes the reply. With CGI, you would return two chunks of output to
STDOUT: one of headers to the browser, and the other of the actual content.

PSGI needs the same information from you, but in a structured form:

    #!perl
    my $app = sub {
        my $env = shift;
        ...

        return [
            '200', # HTTP code
            [
                'Content-Type' => 'application/json',
                %additional_header_pairs,
            ],
            [ @content_hunks ],
        ];
    };

Once the server calls the code reference with the environment, it awaits this
reply. It will then use this reply to return the proper data to the user.

=head1 And the middlewares?

Oh right! The middlewares! Since it is all code references, we can wrap them
in another code reference. We use L<Plack::Builder> for that:

    #!perl
    use Plack::Builder;
    use Plack::Middleware::BufferedStreaming;

    my $webapp = sub { ... };
    my $app    = builder {
        enable 'BufferedStreaming',
        $app,
    };

The C<builder> function (from L<Plack::Builder>) creates a code references
that receives any number of code references and sends the request it receives
to each one in turn. This allows us to aggregate more and more
I<PSGI applications>. Our web application is a PSGI app, but so is a
middleware. when we call C<enable>, it will receive the middleware code
reference and register it.

Thus we created a code reference that aggregates multiple code references,
providing our software with a layer on top that will add buffering. We
can stack more and more middlewares to provide even more features before it
even reaches our actual web application code.

=head1 The future seems bright

Now that we have PSGI and Plack, we can finally program in any web framework we
want without worrying about painting ourselves into a corner, limiting
ourselves with regards to the web server, the technology, and the platform. No
more!  The future is open, and web programming is so much better.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<PSGI>
* L<Plack>
