Title: It's All There in the Numbers!
Topic: Unicode::UCD
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

The number of letters Santa received each year was truly staggering requiring
the operations team at the North Pole to invest heavily in automation just to
keep up.  With state of the art OCR and lexical analysis AI to process the
inputs - light-years ahead of what the humans were using - they were able to
process almost any letter into an ordered list that their fulfillment team
could process:

    1 Barbie
    3 Oranges
    24 Coloring pencils

Which is why Ponsettia Fairytrifle, head of the Letter Processing Team was
surprised when Yule Cuddlefluff, head of the fulfillment team burst into her
office door with a complaint right when she was in the middle of morning tea
break.

"It's no good", he said, "we're just getting garbage out the other end.  It'll
need to be scrapped.  Go back to the old way, with teams of elves reading the
letters round the clock"

"Just wait a minute", Ponsettia countered, "before we throw the elfling out
with the bathwater, how about you show me what's wrong?"

"What's Wrong!  What's Wrong! Just look at this!"

=for html
   <pre><code>    XY Shopkins</code></pre>

"Pure garbage!"

Well, Ponsettia did agree that did look a little unusual, but she thought she'd
dig a little before scrapping her entire department.  She wondered what those
weird characters were, and decided to find out.  Perl's C<unicode::viacode> is
able to print out the name for any unicode codepoint, and C<ord> can turn any
individual character into a codepoint, so...

    #!perl
    use utf8;
    use charnames qw(:full);
    my @chars = split //, "XY";
    say charnames::viacode(ord $_) foreach @chars;

At which point the script printed out:

    BENGALI DIGIT ONE
    BENGALI DIGIT TWO

And everything became clear! The weird I<junk> was just numbers in another
script! After all, the letters did come in from all around the world...

"Don't worry, I can fix this", Ponsettia explained to Yule, "It's just a
minor change to the code".

Unicode::UCD is a core module that has been shipping with Perl since the
pre-releases of Perl 5.8.  One of the things it can do is turn digits of
any script into something Perl will be able treat as a number.

    #!perl
    use Unicode::UCD qw(num);
    say num("\N{CHAM DIGIT ONE}\N{CHAM DIGIT TWO}");  # prints "12"

However, it's clever enough to return undefined if you start mixing your
scripts (as that's likely pure nonsense)

    #!perl
    use Unicode::UCD qw(num);
    say 'junk'
      if !defined num("\N{DEVANAGARI DIGIT THREE}\N{CHAM DIGIT TWO}");

A few minutes after Yule had left Ponsettia had already checked in a change to
her codebase to make the lists print out the right thing.  Disaster quickly
averted she returned to her still warm cup of tea.
