Title: Synchronous Operations are So Outdated
Topic: AnyEvent

=head1 Understanding asynchronous events

The best way to explain why synchronous code can sometimes be daunting
is to use an example from Real Life™. A single day in our lives can contain
plenty of actions that make us cringe and growl. Take, for instance, trying to
make a meal.

Imagining you're cooking. You won't wait for the water to boil before you
prepare the potatoes. Nor will you wait for the potatoes to be done before
you start working on the salad.

Asynchronous programming means having multiple events happen at
the same time. It allows you to get more things done while you're waiting for
other things to happen.

The basis element of asynchronous programming is callbacks, so let's go over
that first, and then take a look at some examples of async in code-land.

We will be using L<AnyEvent> for this article, but the same principles exist
in all other async frameworks.

=head1 Introduction to callbacks

Since multiple events run at the same time, the application (much like the
spice) must flow. To do this, we set up events and already provide them the
code we want them to run when they're ready. Once we've given them all the
information they need, they can start up and we can continue on doing more
things.

We're going to be using one paradigm some are not familiar with: B<callbacks>.
So just to get you up to speed, let me start by explaining callbacks in a
nutshell.

Callbacks are references to subroutines. These subroutines can be defined using
names or be anonymous. We can then call those subroutines by their reference
instead of their name.

    # callbacks to named subroutines
    sub func { ... }
    my $func_reference = \&func;
    $func_reference->(@arguments);

    # callbacks to anonymous subroutines
    my $func_reference = sub { ... };
    $func_reference->(@arguments);

The fact that we can call C<sub> to create a reference to a subroutine, that
means we can send C<sub> directly without saving it first:

    sub some_cb_handler {
        my $callback = shift;
        $callback->("hello");
    }

    some_cb_handler( sub {
        my $greeting = shift;
        say "$greeting, world!";
    } );

=head1 Reading from input

You have an application that needs to read from a handle (which could be a
file descriptor, a socket, or even the standard input), but you don't know
when it will be ready to be read.

In a synchronous application, you'll be waiting for it to become available,
possibly calling C<sleep> in between. But these days, we're busy people, we
can't just be waiting by the phone. We have stuff to do!

    sub alert_action {
        my $action = shift;
        say "New action found: $action";
    }

    my $io_watcher = AnyEvent->io(
        fh   => $fh,
        poll => 'r',
        cb   => sub {
            # we can now read!
            my $input = <$fh>;
            if ( $input =~ /^New action: (\w+)/ ) {
                alert_action($1);
            }
        },
    );

    # continue to do something else

How does that work? By calling L<AnyEvent>'s C<io> method, you're creating a
new watcher that checks polls a file handle for new read events. If it has
something to read, it will call the code reference we provided. Both the checks
and the subroutine call will happen in the background.

Also, since we've given it all the information it needs (what file handle to
poll, what kind of events we want, and what to do in that case), it doesn't
need to hold us back. That way we can continue with some other code, and the
watcher will wait and running the background, without bothering us.

=head1 Keeping the watchers alive

There is a problem I haven't mentioned. That code is fine, except once it
executes the additional code, the application will close, simply because it
reached the end of the file. We want to keep the application running, so our
watchers will continue to work. How do we do that? Condition variables!

Condition variables are variables that represent a condition waiting to come
true, like your cat waiting for you to get comfortable with a laptop and
when it comes true, comes over and lies on it, disrupting your work.

    my $cv      = AnyEvent->condvar;
    my $watcher = AnyEvent->io(
        fh   => $fh,
        poll => 'r',
        cb   => sub {
            my $input = <$fh>;
            ...
            if ( $input =~ /^End of processing file/ ) {
                $cv->send;
            }
        },
    );

    ...
    $cv->recv;
    say "All done!";

This time we created a condition variable that is available to the watcher.
The watcher still dilligently continuing its work. Only this time as soon as it
finds a line in the file indicating the end of it, it will call C<send> on the
condition variable, making the condition true, effecitvely saying "that's it,
we're done".

If someone has called C<recv> on the condition variable, it will wait until
something else in the background (like our watcher) will call C<send> and then
will continue running.

That means that the line "All done!" will only get written once our worker
finished reading the line.

=head1 Timing your cooking

The last element in L<AnyEvent> we'll be taking a look at is the timer. Timers
are events (any event) that gets run at some point in time. It can be in a few
minutes or at a specific time. It can happen once or maybe even several times.

    my $timer = AnyEvent->timer(
        after    => 3.5,
        interval => 5,
        cb       => sub {
            say "Ping? Pong!";
        },
    );

This defines a timer that will wait 3.5 seconds, and then call the subroutine
every 3.5 seconds. Fairly simple. Let's try a few timers.

    my @steps        = qw<Cutting Simmering Cooking Seasoning Serving>;
    my $current_step = 'Preparing';

    my $cv = AnyEvent->condvar;
    my $t1 = AnyEvent->timer(
        interval => 60 * 7,
        cb       => sub {
            say "Current cooking state: $current_step";
        },
    );

    my $t2 = AnyEvent->timer(
        after    => 2, # two seconds to wash hands before working!
        interval => 60 * 10, # assuming every action takes 10 seconds
        cb       => sub {
            $current_step = shift @steps or return $cv->send;
            do_step($current_step);
        },
    );

    $cv->recv;
    say "Dinner is served!";

What we have here isn't the best example for how to make a meal, but it
does give us an example to show multiple timers. The first timer (C<$t1>)
keeps alerting us every seven minutes about our progress. Meanwhile, our
second timer picks up an action to do every 10 minutes, and does it. Once no
more actions are available, it tells the condition variable that it's done.
It does this by simply returning out of the subroutine (so we don't call
C<do_step> again) and calls C<send> at the same time.

After we created our timers, we set up a C<recv> on a condition variable,
meaning "don't continue running the application until we are notified that
the timers finished their work". It will wait in that point in time (without
blocking the timers) until the C<send> is called. Then it will continue and
say dinner is finally served. Since it's the end of the application, the
timers will close and the application will end.

Here is the output we'll get from running the application:

  Current cooking state: Preparing
  (do_step() called with "Cutting")
  Current cooking state: Cutting
  (do_step() called with "Simmering")
  Current cooking state: Simmering
  Current cooking state: Simmering
  (do_step() called with "Cooking")
  Current cooking state: Cooking
  (do_step() called with "Seasoning")
  Current cooking state: Seasoning
  (do_step() called with "Serving")
  Current cooking state: Serving
  Current cooking state: Serving
  Dinner is served!

=head1 Bringing it all together

After we've gone over a few elements of AnyEvent, we can build a small useful
application. We'll add a few more elements such as L<AnyEvent::HTTP>,
L<Regexp::Common>, L<File::Basename>, and C<begin> and C<end> calls for
condition variables.

Suppose we have a file that has contains a lot of links and we want to download
every image listed in it. These are two different actions: (1) Reading the file
and (2) Downloading the images. We will also have a timer that gives us the
progress every single minute.

  #!perl
  use AnyEvent;
  use AnyEvent::HTTP;
  use Regexp::Common 'URI';
  use File::Basename 'basename';
  use autodie;

  my $counter   = 0;
  my $cv        = AnyEvent->condvar;
  my $fh        = open my $fh, '<', 'links.txt';
  my $fhwatcher = AnyEvent->io(
      fh   => $fh,
      poll => 'r',
      cb   => sub {
          my $line = <$fh>;

          # ignoring lines that aren't HTTP URIs
          $line =~ /^$RE{URI}{HTTP}$/ or return;

          # call an HTTP request
          $cv->begin;
          http_get $line, sub {
              my $body     = shift;
              my $filename = basename($line);

              syswrite $filename, $body
                  or warn "Couldn't write to $filename: $!";

              $counter++;
              $cv->end;
          };
      },
  );

  my $progress = AnyEvent->timer(
      after    => 2, # giving it two seconds before starting
      interval => 2,
      cb       => sub {
          printf "[%s] Update: finished downloading $counter images\n",
              scalar AnyEvent->now;
      },
  );

  $cv->recv;
  close $fh;
  say "Finished downloading all files";

Let's analyze what we've got so far. We use some modules that you should
recognize. If you don't, you should check them out.

The next thing is opening a file handle. We then set up a watcher for some
I/O operation using L<AnyEvent>'s C<io> method. It needs the file handle we
are going to operate on, and the kind of operation we'll do (we pick C<r> for
reading) and a callback to run. This callback is the main thing that takes a
bit to understand.

Every time we read a line that has a URL, we call C<begin> on the condition
variable, which means "hey, I'm about to run an action". Each C<begin>
correlates to an C<end> call. We issue an HTTP request for that URL and once
we finish fetching it and saving it, we issue the correlating C<end> call, to
note that the condition variable can be released. This helps when you have more
than just one condition for the variable (like we did earlier with C<send>).

Every time we read a URL, we'll call C<begin>, and end up with multiple
C<begin>s, and every time we finish working on a URL, we call C<end> to clear
the previous C<begin>. When all C<begin> calls C<end>ed, it will return to the
C<recv> method, much like calling C<send>. Simply imagine C<send> as a single
condition, while C<begin> and C<end> are multiple.

We also create a progress timer that indicates every two seconds the amount
of links we've sent. You'll notice it uses L<AnyEvent>'s C<now>, which is a
more compatible way to call C<time> when running in an event loop.

The C<recv> call in the end will wait until all C<begin> calls will be closed
using the C<end> method. Once we've worked on the entire file, it will print
a nice message and the application will close.

=head1 Just the beginning...

Once you get used to programming asynchronously, it's like having scissors:
you just run with it! B<Note:> Do not run with scissors.

Try out an event framework and see how much fun it is for yourself. Perl has
many to offer, such as L<AnyEvent>, L<POE>, L<IO::Async>, L<Reflex>,
L<IO::Lambda>, L<Coro>, and more.

