Author: Christos Argyropoulos
Title: Merry Inline C(hristmas)
Topic: Inline::C

=encoding utf8

=head2 Dancing through the Cnow

It is this time of the year, the time you have finally some time to catch up finishing the
projects you were supposed to do the previous months. A blizzard of C code, like the arrows in
the movie 300 will descend upon you if you do, but you will end up in the naughty list of
researchers if you don't; for who will analyze your data if YOU drop the ball?
But fear not, because L<Inline::C> will save the day and Perl will make the glaCiers melt away.

For the last couple of years, I have been using L<Inline::C> to leverage a large amount of C code
related to biological sequence (text) analysis for my research work. Our group has been using portable
sequencing technologies by L<Oxford Nanopore|https://nanoporetech.com/products/sequence/flongle> to measure
RNA molecules in real-time as markers of kidney disease progression. The problem we are facing is that
understanding the data is not trivial, and many traditional bioinformatic workflows need considerable
adaptation to work. Often, one has to combine exotic pieces of code that is available in C libraries into
complex workflows that are non standard and require one to use the power of Perl to glue them together.
Let's C how L<Inline::C> can help us with the mess.

=head2 To A or not to A?

The molecules I am interested at have a tail of A's at the end of the sequence, e.g. something line
ACTGCCATCAAGAAAAAAAAAAAAA , but the A's are irrelevant to the analysis I want to do. Often there are
errors in the text, so that the sequence is not perfect, e.g.  one is looking at something like this
ACTGCCATCAAGAAAAAAAAAAAAAAGTAACAAAA. The question is, how can I remove the A's at the end of the sequence
knowing that the error exists? There is a Python program L<cutadapt|https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>,
for this task, but note why I don't want to use it for my tasks:

=for :list
* I will have to fire off another process, which is slow
* I will have to use the hard disk and pipes for IPC (slow)
* My downstream data analyses take place in Perl and C, so I will have to convert the data back and forth

Let's C how we can filter the noisy A's in Perl and then how we can add performance with L<Inline::C>.

=head3 Regex for noisy A's

The general idea here is to use a regex that puts an upper limit to the proportion of errors in the A tails
of the sequence. For example something like this:

=begin perl

  my $polyA_min_25_pct_A = qr/
                ( ## match a poly A tail which is
                  ## delimited at its 5' by *at least* one A
                  A{1,}
                      ## followed by the tail proper which has a
                  (?:     ## minimum composition of 25% A, i.e.
                      ## we are looking for snippets with
                      (?:
                              ## up to 3 CTGs followed by at
                              ## least one A
                              [CTG]{0,3}A{1,}
                      )
                      |     ## OR
                      (?:
                              ## at least one A followed by
                              ## up to 3 CTGs
                              A{1,}[CTG]{0,3}
                      )
                  )+    ## extend as much as possible
              )\z/xp;

  # and then use it like this:
  my $s = "ACTGCCATCAAGAAAAAAAAAAAAAAGTAACAAAA";
  $s =~ m/$$polyA_min_25_pct_A/;
  my $best_index = length $1;

=end perl

when one runs the code above, the C<$best_index> will be 29, i.e. the regex filtered out
everything after: ACTGCC

The cutadapt algorithm does not use a regex, but a simple scoring system to decide when to
stop adding letters to the inferred tail. In particular, the algorithm considers all
possible suffixes in the sequence of interest, and after filtering those that have more than
20% non-A letters, returns the position of the suffix with the largest score as the beginning
of the tail. The algorithm in Perl is shown below:

=begin perl

  sub perl_cutadapt {
    my $s          = shift;
    my $n          = length $s;
    my $best_index = $n;
    my $best_score = my $score = 0;
    foreach my $i ( reverse( 0 .. $n - 1 ) ) {
        my $nuc = substr $s, $i, 1;
        $score += $nuc eq 'A' ? +1 : -2;
        if ( $score > $best_score ) {
            $best_index = $i;
            $best_score = $score;
        }
    }
    $best_index = $n - $best_index;
    if ( $best_score < 0.4 * ( $best_index + 1 ) ) {
        $best_index = $n;
    }
    return $best_index;
}

=end perl

The A part is deemed to be 23 letters long and the non-A part is inferred to be ACTGCCATCAAG

=head3 Inline::C for performance

The algorithm as implemented is not very fast, and for large or many sequences it can be very
slow. But as we will C, we can use L<Inline::C> to speed things up. The C code is shown below:

=begin perl

  use Inline (
      C         => 'DATA',
  );
  say _cutadapt_in_C($s);

  __DATA__;
  __C__


  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>
  #include<stdio.h>
  #include <math.h>

  int _cutadapt_in_C(char *s) {
      int n = strlen(s);
      int best_index = n;
      int best_score = 0;
      int score = 0;
      for (int i = n - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
          char nuc = s[i];
          if (nuc == 'A') {
              score += 1;
          }
          else {
              score -= 2;
          }
          if (score > best_score) {
              best_index = i;
              best_score = score;
          }
      }
      best_index = (best_score < -0.4 * (best_index + 1)) ? n : n - best_index;
      return best_index;

  }

=end perl

But how fast is fast? Let's run a benchmark using different sequence lengths
and fixing the length of the A tail to be 20% of the sequence length. The
results (mean and standard deviation in microseconds over 2000 repetitions
for each length) are shown below (the benchmarking code may be found in the /scripts directory of
L<Bio::SeqAlignment::Examples::TailingPolyester>):

=begin code

| Algorithm    | Language | Target Sequence Length |                    |                   |                 |
|--------------|----------|------------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-----------------|
|              |          | 100                    | 1000               | 2000              | 10000           |
|--------------|----------|------------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-----------------|
| cutadapt     | Perl     | 16.0±2.5               | 150.0±11.1         | 310.0±21.0        | 1500.0±88.0     |
| regex        | Perl     | 26.0±10.0              | 310.0±26.0         | 620.0±42.0        | 3200.0±140.0    |
| cutadaptC    | Perl/C   | 0.6±1.0                | 3.1±1.1            | 6.0±1.4           | 28.0±4.3        |

=end code

A nice 30-50x speedup for the C code over the Perl code. The savings are real, considering that
a typical long RNA-seq experiment may have 10^6 - 10^7 reads, and each read may have a length of 1000 bases.

=head2 Making memories this C(hristmas)

The C code is not very complex, but it is a good example of how one can use L<Inline::C> to speed up
tasks. But the module can help with more than that. For example, one can use it to interface with
other foreign code, by making and managing shared memory regions. Consider an example,
in which we hijack the C<Newxz> and C<Safefree> functions from the Perl API to allocate and free
memory areans to make C<$memory>. Such a variable is effectively a pointer to a memory arena, and
we can use it to store and retrieve data from it. Suppose that one had a library that took such an
arena as input and filled it with data. Then the arena could dance with any other library that
expected a pointer to a memory arena. The library could be written in C, or Assembly. For example,
this is how one can sum lots and lots of random numbers using either C or Assembly, under the
loving embrace of Perl working with L<Inline::C>:

=begin perl

    use Inline (
        C         => 'DATA',
    );
    use Inline (
        C         => 'DATA',
    );
    my $number_of_doubles = 2_000_000;
    my $memory = alloc_with_Newxz($number_of_doubles*8);
    generate_random_double_array($memory, $number_of_doubles);

    use Benchmark qw(:all);
    cmpthese(
        -1,
        {
            'C' => sub { sum_array_C($memory, $number_of_doubles) },
            'ASM' => sub { sum_array_doubles($memory, $number_of_doubles) },
            'ASM_AVX' => sub { sum_array_doubles_AVX_unaligned($memory, $number_of_doubles) },
        }
    );

    free_with_Safefree($memory);


    use Inline
    ASM     => 'DATA',
    AS      => 'nasm',
    ASFLAGS => '-f elf64',
    PROTO   => {
        sum_array_doubles=> 'double(void *,size_t)',
        sum_array_doubles_AVX_unaligned => 'double(void *,size_t)',

    };


    __DATA__;
    __C__


    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #include<stdio.h>
    #include <math.h>


    int _cutadapt_in_C(char *s) {
        int n = strlen(s);
        int best_index = n;
        int best_score = 0;
        int score = 0;
        for (int i = n - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
            char nuc = s[i];
            if (nuc == 'A') {
                score += 1;
            }
            else {
                score -= 2;
            }
            if (score > best_score) {
                best_index = i;
                best_score = score;
            }
        }
        best_index = (best_score < -0.4 * (best_index + 1)) ? n : n - best_index;
        return best_index;

    }

    #define IsSVValidPtr(sv)  do { \
        if (!SvOK((sv))) { \
            croak("Pointer is not defined"); \
        } \
        if (!SvIOK((sv))) { \
            croak("Pointer does not contain an integer"); \
        } \
        IV value = SvIV((sv)); \
        if (value <= 0) { \
                croak("Pointer is negative or zero"); \
        } \
    } while(0)

    #define SetTypedPtr(ptr,sv, type) type *ptr; \
        ptr = (type *) SvIV((sv))


    void generate_random_double_array(SV *sv, size_t num_elements) {
        IsSVValidPtr(sv);
        SetTypedPtr(array, sv, double);
        for (size_t i = 0; i < num_elements; ++i) {
            array[i] = ((double)rand() / RAND_MAX) * 10.0 - 5.0;
        }
    }

    double sum_array_C(SV *sv, size_t length) {
        IsSVValidPtr(sv);
        double sum = 0.0;
        SetTypedPtr(array, sv, double);
        for (size_t i = 0; i < length; i++) {
            sum += array[i];
        }
        return sum;
    }



    // get a buffer
    SV* alloc_with_Newxz(size_t length) {
        char* array ;
        Newxz(array, length, char);
        return newSVuv(PTR2UV(array));
    }

    void free_with_Safefree(size_t address) {
        void* buffer = (void*)address;
        Safefree(buffer);
    }


    __ASM__
    NSE    equ 4 ; number of SIMD double elements per iteration
    DOUBLE equ 8 ; number of bytes per double
    ; Use RIP-relative memory addressing
    default rel

    ; Mark stack as non-executable for Binutils 2.39+
    section .note.GNU-stack noalloc noexec nowrite progbits

    SECTION .text

    global sum_array_doubles
    sum_array_doubles: ; based on Kusswurm listing 5-7c
        ; Initialize
        vxorpd xmm0, xmm0, xmm0 ; sum = 0.0
        sub rdi, DOUBLE              ; rdi = &array[-1]

        Loop1:
            add rdi, DOUBLE
            vaddsd xmm0, xmm0, qword [rdi]
            sub rsi, 1
            jnz Loop1
        ret


    global sum_array_doubles_AVX_unaligned
    sum_array_doubles_AVX_unaligned: ; based on Kusswurm listing 9-4d
        vxorpd ymm0, ymm0, ymm0         ; sum = 0.0

                                        ; i = 0 in the comments of this block
        lea r10,[rdi - DOUBLE]          ; r10 = &array[i-1]
        cmp rsi, NSE                    ; check if we have at least NSE elements
        jb Remainder_AVX                ; if not, jump to remainder
        lea r10, [rdi-NSE * DOUBLE]     ; r10 = &array[i-NSE]


        Loop1_AVX:
            add r10, DOUBLE * NSE        ; r10 = &array[i]
            vaddpd ymm0, ymm0, [r10]     ; sum += array[i]
            sub rsi, NSE                 ; decrement the counter
            cmp rsi, NSE                 ; check if we have at least NSE elements
            jae Loop1_AVX                ; if so, loop again

        ; Reduce packed sum using SIMD addition
        vextractf128 xmm1, ymm0, 1      ; extract the high 128 bits
        vaddpd xmm2, xmm1, xmm0         ; sum += high 128 bits
        vhaddpd xmm0, xmm2, xmm2        ; sum += low 128 bits
        test rsi, rsi                   ; check if we have any elements left
        jz End_AVX                      ; if not, jump to the end

        add r10, DOUBLE * NSE  - DOUBLE ; r10 = &array[i-1]


        ; Handle the remaining elements
        Remainder_AVX:
            add r10, DOUBLE
            vaddsd xmm0, xmm0, qword [r10]
            sub rsi, 1
            jnz Remainder_AVX

        End_AVX:
        ;vmovsd xmm0, xmm5
        ret

=end perl

In this example we make 2 million of doubles, fill them up with random numbers
and then benchmark their sum them up in either C or Assembly. For the latter
we can use your grandfather's era Assembly or bring to the table a vectorized
version that uses SIMD instructions (in this case AVX extensions). In my
old Xeon, this is what I get:

          Rate     ASM       C ASM_AVX
ASM      565/s      --     -0%    -68%
C        565/s      0%      --    -68%
ASM_AVX 1778/s    215%    215%      --

In my applications, I use this trick to interface with vectorized, hand optimized
Assembly code, when intrinsics fail to deliver performance in C. But even in such cases,
the memory management is done by Perl through L<Inline::C>.

=head2 Conclusions

Give your self a present this C(hristmas) and learn how to use L<Inline::C> to speed things up.
And if making memories seems too much, fear not, the L<Task::MemManager> module that I wrote up,
will cut you some slaCk.

=cut
