Author: Gonzalo Diethelm <gonzus@cpan.org>
Title: A Trio of Modules to Speed Up Your Web Applications!
Topic: HTTP::XSHeaders, URI::XSEscape, HTTP::XSCookies

=encoding utf8

It is the season of giving, and Perl has a few special packages waiting under the tree that can give your web applications a little extra pep in their step. This holiday, let's celebrate three modules that make web development smoother and faster: L<HTTP::XSHeaders>, L<HTTP::XSCookies>, and L<URI::XSEscape>. These tools are like those little surprises that make everything run just a bit better, a bit faster — without you lifting a finger. Let's unwrap their magic and see how they bring a new level of efficiency to Perl web applications!

=head2 HTTP::XSHeaders and URI::XSEscape: Sleigh-Speed for Your Framework

If you're using a web framework built on Perl, chances are it relies on L<HTTP::Headers> and L<URI::Escape> under the hood. These modules are hard workers, responsible for parsing HTTP headers and handling URL encoding, respectively, but they are not the quickest reindeer in the race. Luckily, here come L<HTTP::XSHeaders> and L<URI::XSEscape> — both designed to give your application a boost.

When your code loads C<HTTP::XSHeaders> or C<URI::XSEscape>, they automatically override C<HTTP::Headers> (even its faster variant, C<HTTP::Headers::Fast>) and C<URI::Escape>, making your web framework faster without a single line of modification.

Even better, if you are using the L<Dancer2> framework, it will automatically detect and load C<HTTP::XSHeaders> and C<URI::XSEscape> if they are available, boosting performance without any extra setup. It is like a holiday bonus for your application, giving it speed improvements without any added work!

=head2 HTTP::XSCookies: A Sweet Swap for Framework Developers

For developers building web frameworks, there is another gift waiting for you: L<HTTP::XSCookies>. This module serves as a high-speed replacement for L<HTTP::Cookies>, designed to speed up cookie handling without the need for reindeer-powered sleighs. Unlike the other two modules, C<HTTP::XSCookies> doesn’t override the original module. So, if you want your application to take advantage of its speed, you will need to replace C<HTTP::Cookies> with C<HTTP::XSCookies> directly in your codebase.

However, if you are using the C<Dancer2> framework, it will automatically use C<HTTP::XSCookies> if it is installed, allowing your code to benefit from its performance boost seamlessly.

=head2 Deck the Code with Speed

These modules aren’t just gifts for your application — they are here to spread holiday cheer to your users too. By loading just a few lines of code, you will be spreading joy in the form of faster response times and more efficient performance. Whether you are a user or a developer, these modules are like holiday magic for your Perl-based web applications.

=head2 Wishing You a Snappy and Speedy New Year!

So this holiday season, consider giving your web application the gift of speed. With C<HTTP::XSHeaders>, C<HTTP::XSCookies>, and C<URI::XSEscape> in your toolkit, you are set for a snappier, speedier new year. Here is to faster code, happy users, and a fantastic Perl-powered holiday!

=cut
