Author: brian d foy <briandfoy@pobox.com>
Title: Santa's Naughty and Nice Data Formats
Topic: Data::Rx

=encoding utf8

=head2 Santa's Naughty and Nice Data Formats

Santa faces some of the same technology issues that many of us have
faced. After a succession of elves half-implemented a reindeer
tracking system, his reindeer database is in a sad state, there's
nobody to fix it, and his naughty list has a special section for
people who create dirty data.

Now he needs to fix up his records so he can
generate the reports his compliance elves keep hassling him about (a whole
other thing—don't ask). That same compliance team also makes Santa use auditable source control, so
his L<data and programs are in
GitHub|https://github.com/briandfoy/santas-reindeers-rx-perl-advent-2024>.

One file, F<data/donner.json>, started with this data:

    #!vim json

    {
      "Name": "Donner",
      "aliases": [
        "Dunder",
        "Donder"
      ],
      "start-date": "1823-12-24"
    }

Another file, F<data/rudolph.json>, has similar data but with slightly
different field names and a different date format. This one must have
come fromt the new interns who had to guess what to do because there
aren't any docs:

    #!vim json

    {
      "name": "Rudolph",
      "start_date": "12/24/1939"
    }

These differences mean that some reindeers are left out of some of the
reindeer games because their records are simply skipped.

=head2 Enter Data::Rx

At first this seems like a simple problem of checking each hash
to ensure it has the right set of keys. The same goes for its values.
That could be its own Perl program. But, as the data structure gets
more and more complicated, so does the code. Santa is an old-school,
zero-conf, minimal code sorta guy.

L<Data::Rx> provides a way to declare what a data structure should
look like and what sort of values it should have. Santa knows it's
going to take a minute to clean up all of his files, so he'll start
with two things he knows. He wants the fields to be C<name> and
C<start_date>. He creates his Rx specification as a Perl data structure:

=begin perl

	my $record = {
		type     => '//rec',
		required => {
			name       => { type => '//str' },
			start_date => { type => '//str' },
			},
		};

=end perl

This says that there is a record type (think "hash"), that there are
two required keys, and that the values for those keys are strings. This
Perl data structure is the basis for the schema that L<Data::Rx>
creates and which Santa then uses to validate a data structure:

    #!perl

	use Data::Rx;
	my $rx = Data::Rx->new;
	my $schema = $rx->make_schema($record);

	eval { $schema->assert_valid($data) };

Putting that together with the boring programming work gets Santa his
starting program:

=begin perl

	use v5.14;

	use Data::Rx;
	use Mojo::File;
	use Mojo::JSON;

	my $record = {
		type     => '//rec',
		required => {
			name       => { type => '//str' },
			start_date => { type => '//str' },
			},
		};

	my $rx = Data::Rx->new;
	my $schema = $rx->make_schema($record);

	foreach my $file ( sort @ARGV ) {
		say "Checking $file";

		my $data = eval { Mojo::JSON::decode_json( Mojo::File->new($file)->slurp ) };
		unless( $data ) {
			my $error = $@ =~ s/\.^/\n/gmr;
			say "\tCould not read <$file>: $error";
			next;
			}

		eval { $schema->assert_valid($data) };
		my $at = $@;
		next unless length $at;

		foreach my $failure ( @{ $at->failures } ) {
			say "\t$failure";
			}
		};

=end perl

Santa runs his progam on a couple of the files, knowing he's going to get
several errors. Just with the two files shown earlier, Santa finds that
there are some misnamed fields ("unexpected entries")
and missing values for required entries:

    #!vim bash

	$ perl bin/validate data/rudolph.json data/donner.json
	Checking data/donner.json
		Failed //rec: found unexpected entries: Name aliases start-date (error: unexpected at $data)
		Failed //rec: no value given for required entry start_date (error: missing at $data)
		Failed //rec: no value given for required entry name (error: missing at $data)
	Checking data/rudolph.json

He'll fix these up in a moment, but he has to run out to the workshop
to handle a slow down on the toy train assembly line. That gives you
some time to investigate Rx.

=head2 The Rx Language

The L<Rx language|https://rx.codesimply.com> allows us to easily
specify basic structure as well as extend it for more complex types. The
L<Data::Rx> module implements this for Perl, but the language can be
implemented in anything (and just about is). We can write out our specification
in just about anything too, but we'll stick to Perl for now.

In Perl, this starts with a hash with the key C<type> to specify what
the first element should be. In this case, the type is C<//rec>, the
Rx name for a hash (dictionary, map, JSON object, and so on):

=begin perl

	my $record = {
		type => '//rec',
		};

=end perl

There are many other types, but at the top level you probably have
a C<//rec>, C<//arr> (array), C<//map> (all values are the same type),
or a C<//seq> (sequence).

Next, we can specify the required keys, and specify the value that
each of these keys takes. Each of the values is another Rx specification,
and in this case, each of them is a string (C<//str>):

=begin perl

	my $record = {
		type     => '//rec',
		required => {
			name       => { type => '//str' },
			start_date => { type => '//str' },
			},
		};

=end perl

Once we have our schema, we tell L<Data::Rx> to create the Perl
object we can use to validate the data:

=begin perl

	my $rx = Data::Rx->new;
	my $schema = $rx->make_schema($record);

=end perl

To apply the schema to a Perl data structure, we call C<assert_valid>,
which throws an exception if the validation fails:

=begin perl

	eval { $schema->assert_valid($data) };

=end perl

There's also a binary C<check>, but that only reports yes or no. That
could be valuable in some cases, such as when we don't want to see
thousands of lines of errors in continuous integration.

But now Santa has got the toy trains running again, so he's back to
working on his data problems.

=head2 Fixing the data errors

Santa fixes up the field names easily enough to get the new C<data/donner.json>:

    #!vim json

    {
      "aliases": [
        "Dunder",
        "Donder"
      ],
      "name": "Donner",
      "start_date": "1823-12-24"
    }

Some of the errors, but he still has an error for the C<aliases> key:

    #!vim bash

	$ perl bin/validate data/rudolph.json data/donner.json
	Checking data/donner.json
		Failed //rec: found unexpected entries: Name aliases (error: unexpected at $data)
	Checking data/rudolph.json

To handle C<aliases>, Santa needs to specify an array. In Rx, an array
has values that are all the same type (say, all strings). Santa
extends his specification a little. He makes the C<aliases> field
optional. It's okay if Donner has aliases (more than one even), and it's
okay if Rudolph doesn't have that field at all:

=begin perl

	my $record = {
		type     => '//rec',
		required => {
			name       => { type => '//str' },
			start_date => { type => '//str' },
			},
		optional => {
			aliases => {
				type => '//arr',
				contents => '//str'
				}
			},
		};

=end perl

Now both files validate:

    #!vim bash

	$ perl bin/validate data/rudolph.json data/donner.json
	Checking data/donner.json
	Checking data/rudolph.json

=head2 Custom types

Santa still has a problem because the date formats in his two test
records don't match. The values are both strings, but that's it. Donner
has C<1823-12-24> but Rudolph has C<12/24/1939>.

Santa defines a new package that inherits from
L<Data::Rx::CommonType::EasyNew>. This package defines C<type_uri>,
which is the name for the new type, and C<assert_valid>, which is the
Perl subroutine that calls C<fail> with the parts that L<Data::Rx>
needs to report the error:

=begin perl

	package Reindeer::YYYYMMDD {
		use parent 'Data::Rx::CommonType::EasyNew';

		sub type_uri {
			'tag:example.com,EXAMPLE:rx/reindeer-date',
			}

		sub assert_valid {
			my ($self, $value) = @_;
			return 1 unless defined $value;
			$value =~ /\A(?:\d\d\d\d)-\d\d-\d\d\z/a or $self->fail({
				error => [ qw(type) ],
				message => "date value is not YYYY-MM-DD",
				value => $value,
				})
			}
		}

=end perl

(You can put this in a separate file and load it with C<use>, or stick
it right in the current program.)

To use this new type, Santa loads it as part of the call to C<new>:

=begin perl

	my $rx = Data::Rx->new({
	  type_plugins => [qw(
		Reindeer::YYYYMMDD
	  )],	});

=end perl

Now Santa's program catches the date format error:

    #!vim bash

	$ perl bin/validate data/rudolph.json data/donner.json
	Checking data/donner.json
	Checking data/rudolph.json
		Failed tag:example.com,EXAMPLE:rx/reindeer-date: date value is not YYYY-MM-DD (error: type at $data->{start_date})

Santa didn't have to change anything in the meat of his program. Everything
in the C<foreach> loop stayed the same and he only has the change his
Rx specification. Whoever invented Rx and L<Data::Rx> are quickly moving
to the top of his Nice list (and that would be the double nice Rik SIGNES).


I write about this sort of thing quite a bit in
L<Effective Perl Programming|https://www.effectiveperlprogramming.org/>
and L<Mastering Perl|https://www.masteringperl.org/>. Moving things out
of logic and into configuration makes the program easier to modify and
the data easier to understand.

=head2 The schema as configuration

Since Santa's L<Data::Rx> schema is really a data structure, anything that can
create that data structure can be its source. For example, Santa could
put it in a YAML file (if you'd rather have JSON, you can do that instead):

    #!vim yaml

	---
	type: '//rec'
	required:
		name:
			type: '//str'
		start_date:
			type: 'tag:example.com,EXAMPLE:rx/reindeer-date'
	optional:
		aliases:
			type: '//arr'
			contents: '//str'

In Santa's program, he loads his schema with the L<YAML> module instead
of defining it as code. The rest of the program stays the same:

=begin perl

	use YAML;

	my $record = YAML::LoadFile( 'rx.yml' );

=end perl

By having the schema outside of the Perl source, Santa can reuse it
with other tools. So far, Rx has only very limited support for custom
types, so those parts still have to live in code.

=head2 See Data::Rx in action

I used a very simple example to give you the flavor of Rx, but I'm
using this on actual data structures for
L<CPAN Security Advisories|https://github.com/briandfoy/cpan-security-advisory>. Each reported CPAN distribution has a file dedicated to
it, and there are certain pieces of information we want to collect for each
distribution and for each advisory in that distribution. Some of that
is hand-edited, which inevitably leads to mistakes.

Adding Data::Rx tests, as in
L<xt/validate.t|https://github.com/briandfoy/cpan-security-advisory/blob/master/xt/validate.t> and L<xt/validate-db.t|https://github.com/briandfoy/cpan-security-advisory/blob/master/xt/validate-db.t>, allows us to check every data file for
structure, format, and values.

In those tests you'll see more of Rx's core types, more custom types,
and more complicated structures.

=head2 Further Reading

=for :list
* L<The Rx language|https://rx.codesimply.com>
* L<The Data::Rx module|https://metacpan.org/pod/Data::Rx>
* L<Santa's GitHub repo|https://github.com/briandfoy/santas-reindeers-rx-perl-advent-2024>
* L<The History of Santa's Reindeer|https://www.altogetherchristmas.com/traditions/reindeer.html>
* L<The Running Reindeer Ranch|https://runningreindeer.com>

=cut
