=for advent_year 2010

=for advent_day 18

=for advent_title On the 2nd day of Xmas Santa hits the bar pretty hard!

=for advent_author Adam Russell   

=begin eds

Re: the ordinal in the title, A<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twelve_Days_of_Christmas|Christmastide> begins on the 25<sup>th</sup> and runs though Epiphany.

=end eds

Santa is truly a big picture guy. He prefers to get a sense of data
quickly to make the important executive decisions, so the P<2010-16|NMS>
needs to be able to provide a summary of the available data.
Nick also gets increasingly impatient as the big day fast approaches,
and yearns for figures on how the tallies of who has been naughty and
nice are shaping up in order to place the final just-in-time toy orders

As very straightforward module without much mystery to it, M<Text::BarGraph>
fits the bill nicely. Even Santa's most junior elf can whip up a small bit
of code to query the NMS and produce an easy to decipher ASCII-art chart.
The naughty nice tally is an ongoing work with data being fed constantly into
a database from around the world. Since this reporter has been sworn to secrecy
concerning this most valuable of data stores, the sample code below contains
only some static sample data reflecting a recent snapshot.

<tt style="display:block; color: gray; background: black">
unknown (129398430) <span style='color: darkblue'>*********</span><br />
naughty (233314664) <span style='color: darkblue'>**************</span><span style='color: darkgreen'>***</span><br />
&nbsp; &nbsp;nice (456089984) <span style='color: darkblue'>**************</span><span style='color: darkgreen'>***************</span><span style='color: #8b8b00'>****</span>
</tt>

Using M<Text::BarGraph> is as simple as constructing a hash for your data
and passing your BarGraph object's C<graph()> method a reference to it.
You can also A<#mod18.pl.13|change the graphing character>,
A<#mod18.pl.16|sort records>, and set the max data value to
A<#mod18.pl.15|scale the chart width>, among other adjustments. Perhaps of
most use is the ability to display the graph bars in color&mdash;in segments
as wide as 25% of the maximum width of the graph&mdash;if
P<2004-02|Term::ANSIColor> is available

=sourcedcode mod18.pl

=cut