=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 13

=for advent_title For Krismash, I wante a pony (pleez)

=for advent_author Yanick Champoux

Gluggag&aelig;gir (Glugg to his friends) has been employed by the North Pole for a
long, long time. Although he started his career as a modest candy cane
painter, he worked his way steadily up the Elvin professional ladder along the
years. Reindeer wrangler, eggnog tester, rubber duck tuner, cookie engineer,
he's done it all. And right now he's enjoying what he thinks is his funniest
job so far: member of the North Pole elite IT staff.

It's under that function that, a few weeks ago, he got briefed about a skunk
work project commissioned by the Big Red himself. Although he's not at
liberty to reveal much information about it at the moment, let's just say that
it has to do with children letters. His part of the project was to come up
with a way to automatically spellcheck those letters.

I<No problem>, he thought. He was going to use M<Text::SpellChecker>,
a nice wrapper around M<Text::Aspell> that&mdash;among other things&mdash;
provides context and globally replaces words. And, indeed, a few typed lines
later, he was happily sending in his brand new script to be added to the
North Pole production system. 

And that's when the cookie dough hit the Christmas wreath.
Poor Glugg, it turned out, had overlooked two things...

The first was a internal detail of M<Text::SpellChecker>: the module creates a
new instance of a M<Text::Aspell> object each time it spellcheck a word. Not a
big deal if one goes through a single text, a much bigger deal if one deals
with a system processing the letters of all the children of the world. The
system, as it was, just wasn't optimized enough.

But the second problem was, by far, the worst. Although the children's letters
were written in all languages, M<Text::SpellChecker> objects couldn't be
configured away from the default. The way Glugg implemented his script, the
wishes of all non-English speaking children would be "corrected" into
gibberish. Catastrophe!

Needless to say, Glugg was deeply ashamed of the high-handed way he dealt with
his part of the project. Now in full knowledge of his requirements, and
pitfalls of his first solution, he retreated to his gingerbread cube and
A<patch|hacked>N<rt> at M<Text::SpellChecker> till he got it working
just the way he wanted. Which, happily enough, didn't take too long.  He even
had the time to add the functionality developed by his colleague
Fr&oacute;dusleikir to P<2008-4|auto-detect a letter's language>.

=begin pre

$ spellomatic < letter-61358.txt

--- original letter:

Cher Papa Noel,

Comme cadaut, je veux un gros camion jaune.

Bisoux,
Martin


--- corrected letter:

Cher Papa No&euml;l,

Comme cadeau, je veux un gros camion jaune.

Bisou,
Martin

=end pre

Once again, everything was well with the North Pole computer systems. And now
that Glugg's part of the project was up and running, it was time to execute
the next step of Santa's secret project. But this, boys and girls, is a story
for another day...

=sourcedcode mod13.pl

=begin footnote rt

&hellip;and submitted it to A<http://rt.cpan.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=41685|RT> of course.

=end footnote rt
