Title: Finding CPAN distributions with github repositories
Topic: MetaCPAN::Client
Author: Neil Bowers <neil@bowers.com>

Blink the elf wasn't happy, because Father C wasn't happy. Blink had been
told to send presents to every CPAN author who released a new distribution
(aka I<neocpanism>)
to CPAN this year, regardless of who had done the most recent release
of the distribution.
But the distribution had to still be on CPAN.

"Does SHARYANTO get one for I<every> dist?!", Blink had asked,
but got a cuff round the ear for that.

He thought he'd done a good job, but the Senior Elf had just been to tell him
that some authors had missed out.

Father C doesn't like it when people don't get the presents they should.

=head2 What went wrong?

Blink had remembered that they have their own CPAN mirror at the North Pole,
so he just used L<Path::Iterator::Rule> to iterate over it, looking
for the C<META.yml> files which hold the metadata for each distribution.
From those he pulled out the
L<name|https://metacpan.org/pod/CPAN::Meta::Spec#name> key,
which holds the distribution's name.

He'd remembered that they have a database of CPAN authors and their
L<neocpanisms|http://neilb.org/neocpanisms/>,
so he'd used that get the other information he needed.

But on closer inspection, he discovered that not all distribution names
from metadata files matched those in the database.
"Sort it out, and send some pull requests!", the Senior Elf had chastised him.

=head2 Distribution names

When you create a module C<Foo::Bar>, you would normally release it to CPAN
as part of a distribution called C<Foo-Bar>. You can specify the distribution
name yourself, but distribution builders like L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>
will produce the dist name for you, based on the module name.
The distribution name ends up in the metadata file.

When you release a version of your distribution, the I<tarball> usually
has a name built up from the distribution name, the version, and whatever
extension is used for the archiving method you used. So Foo::Bar 0.01
would probably be released in B<Foo-Bar-0.01.tar.gz>. If Blink had released
this, the location of this release on CPAN would be:

 B/BL/BLINK/Foo-Bar-0.01.tar.gz

These paths turn up everywhere in the CPAN ecosystem, so
there's a module L<CPAN::DistnameInfo> which takes a path and picks it apart.
As a result, most parts of the ecosystem assume that the dist name inferred
by L<CPAN::DistnameInfo> is the right distribution name.

The problem can arise where the release name isn't based on the distribution
name, which might be for a variety of reasons. Sometimes the filename
has the right dist name, and it's the metadata that doesn't.

=head2 Finding the problem distributions

"Talk to Olaf", Senior Elf had told Blink. But after a frustrating ten
minutes, Blink went back to SE, complaining that Olaf just sang about
summer.
"No, not L<Olaf the Snowman|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olaf_(Disney)>,
I meant L<Olaf Alders|https://metacpan.org/author/OALDERS>!".

With Olaf's help, Blink wrote the following, to iterate over all
CPAN distributions, using the MetaCPAN API:

 use MetaCPAN::Client;
 my $client = MetaCPAN::Client->new();
 my $query  = { all => [
                   { status   => 'latest' },
                   { maturity => 'released' },
              ]};
 my $params     = { fields => [qw/ metadata download_url /] };
 my $result_set = $client->release($query, $params);
 my $scroller   = $result_set->scroller;

 while (my $result = $scroller->next) {
    my $release = $result->{fields};
 }

You can look at the release data for a distribution using the API in
a browser, for example L<https://api.metacpan.org/release/URI-Title>.
You'll see there's a lot of information. If you're only interested in some
of it, you can just request specific fields (the C<$params> hashref above,
passed to the C<release> method. The C<$release> above is a hashref,
which contains slices of the data you saw from the API.

The two bits of interest here are:

 my $distname = $release->{metadata}->{name};
 # "URI-Title"

 my $path     = $release->{download_url};
 # "http://cpan.metacpan.org/authors/id/B/BO/BOOK/URI-Title-1.89.tar.gz"

You can then give that C<$path> to L<CPAN::DistnameInfo>, and the C<dist>
method tells you what it thinks the distribution name is.
So Blink could compare that with the name from the metadata file,
which handily is also available:

 use CPAN::DistnameInfo;
 my $dinfo = CPAN::DistnameInfo->new($path);
 push(@bad, $path) if $dinfo->dist ne $distname;

So now Blink could build a list of problem distributions, but he'd been
told to send some pull requests as penance. How could he find out which
of the distributions were on github?

He found an L<article|http://perlmaven.com/how-to-add-link-to-version-control-system-of-a-cpan-distributions> which explained how the github repository
can be recorded in a distribution's metadata.
If you look in L<that API output|https://api.metacpan.org/release/URI-Title>,
you'll find it under the C<resources> key.

You can use this fact to constrain your MetaCPAN search, so that you
only consider distributions with a github repo in their metadata:

 my $query  = { all => [
                   {                     status => 'latest'   },
                   {                   maturity => 'released' },
                   { 'resources.repository.url' => '*github*' },
              ]};

Blink completed his task,
and L<TEODESIAN|https://metacpan.org/author/TEODESIAN>
got his gifts, amongst others.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<MetaCPAN::Client>
* L<CPAN::DistnameInfo>

