Title: So here it is Merry Christmas
Topic: Perl Advent 2014
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

Another year of Perl Advent had drawn to a close, and what a year it's been.
I hope you've enjoyed reading all the articles as much as I have.

=head2 Everybody's having fun

Of course, just because Advent is over for another year, doesn't mean the gift of
Perl modules has to end.  As I write this there are one hundred and forty one
thousand seven hundred and forty nine modules on the CPAN and each year we only
get to publish twenty-four advent articles.  So where can you read about the
rest of these modules and other exciting things happening in Perl?

=for html
<ul>
  <li>You can search for Perl modules at <a href="https://metacpan.org/">metacpan</a>
  where you can also see a list of <a href="https://metacpan.org/recent">recently
  published modules</li><li><a href="http://cpanratings.perl.org/">CPAN Ratings</a> offers a ratings
  and reviews of Perl modules.  It's like a democatic advent calendar each day
  of the year!</li>
  <li>The <a href="http://perlweekly.com/">Perl Weekly</a> provides one small
  succinct email a week with a summary of the interesting things happing in Perl
  that week, including new modules, interesting articles and upcoming events.</li>
  <li><a href="http://blogs.perl.org/">blogs.perl.org</a> hosts a vast number of
  Perl blogs if you're looking for more articles to read throughout the year.  The <a href="http://ironman.enlightenedperl.org/">
  Perl Ironman Challenge</a> links to a lot more blogs as part of the <em>updating
  your Perl blog weekly</em> challenge</li>
  <li>You're reading the original programming article for advent advent calendar,
  but if you like the format there's a whole collection of them available dedicated
  to other aspects of Perl (e.g. <a href="http://www.catalystframework.org/calendar/2014">Catalyst</a>,
  <a href="http://advent.perldancer.org/2014">Dancer</a>, <a href="http://perl6advent.wordpress.com/2014/">Perl 6</a>,
  <a href="http://advent.perl.kr/2014/">Seoul.pm</a>, <a href="http://shadow.cat/blog/matt-s-trout/">MSTPAN</a>, and
  <a href="http://blogs.perl.org/users/perlancar/2014/12/perlancars-2014-advent-calendar.html">perlancar</a>.)  Other
  languages have also adopted the format and <a href="http://www.lenjaffe.com/AdventPlanet/2014/">Advent Planet</a>
  has a meta calendar that links to each entry for that day for over twenty
  calendars</li>
  <li>Of course, if you want more Perl Advent articles, there's always the
  previous <a href="http://perladvent.org/archives.html">fourteen years of advent
  calendar</a> to go through.  Happy reading!</li>
</ul>

The Perl Advent Calendar wouldn't be possible without the hard work of all the
article authors.  This year we owe thanks to Alex Balhatchet, Augustina Ragwitz,
Dave Cross, Graham Ollis, John SJ Anderson, Legolas Greenleaf, Marcus Ramberg,
Mark Allen, Mark Fowler, Neil Bowers, Nova Patch, Olaf Alders, Paul "LeoNerd"
Evans and Ricardo Signes.  These people not only devoted untold time writing
and formatting their articles, but put up with me repeatedly hassling them with
my self imposed deadlines and bugging them with copy corrections.  Thank you
for putting up with me.

Thanks also to everyone who submitted corrections, helped organize, setup
hosting, debugged software issues, and otherwise did the unglamorous things
that made the advent calendar happen.

=head2 Look to the future now

As a Perl programmer reading the calendar chances are you have an article in
you for publishing next year even if you don't know what it is yet.  I
encourage you to <s>subscribe to the L<mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent></s>
check the L<perladvent/Perl-Advent GitHub repo|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent/>
where we organize all of this and simply drop us an email saying you'd be
interested in writing (you'll get a follow up email from me in about eight
months when we start working out scheduling for 2015.)

=head2 It's only just begun

Perl does a lot for you.  It keeps you entertained, it makes your life easier,
and chances are it keeps you employed.  In this season of giving you might
consider making a small donation to L<The Perl Foundation|https://donate.perlfoundation.org/donate.html>
who do important work, including sponsoring developers to work full time on
improving the core of Perl.

=head2 It's Christmas!

Merry Christmas, one and all.

