Title: A Subroutine By Any Other Name
Topic: Sub::Util
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

Perl's function prototypes can be used in clever ways to create new syntax,
but abusing anonymous subroutines in this fashion can often result in hard
to read stacktraces which make your code hard to debug.  One simple solution
is to manually name all your anonymous subroutines using the handy
Sub::Util module

=head2 Creating New Syntax With Perl

Often I find myself having to sort a list by some property of the item I'm
sorting, for example the number of bytes the strings would take to encode
in utf-8.

This is easy enough, if you're prepared to be inefficent:

    #!perl
    use Encode qw(encode_utf8);

    my @sorted = sort { 
        length encode_utf8 $a <=> length encode_utf8 $b
    } @strings;

The problem with this is that Perl has to recalcuate the utf-8 encoding of the
string multiple times: Every time it wants to compare the length of a string
against another string (which it has to do multiple times as it's sorting.)
There's a standard trick that you can do in Perl to avoid this called a Swartzian
transform:

    #!perl
    my @sorted = 
          map  { $_->[0] }
          sort { $a->[1] <=> $b->[1] }
          map  { [$_, length encode_utf8 $_ ] } @_;

This rather ugly syntax was created by Randal Schwartz to build a data
structure on the fly that contains the weighting value, sort that, then
extract the original (now sorted) values out again.  Easy to understand,
right?  No?  Maybe we could abstract that away in a subroutine call?

  #!perl
  sub weighted_sort {
      # the anonymous subroutine that calculates a weighting for whatever is
      # in $_
      my $weighter = shift;

      return 
        map  { $_->[0] }
        sort { $a->[1] <=> $b->[1] }
        map  { [$_, $weighter->() ] } @_;
  }

This can then be used like so:

    #!perl
    my @sorted = weighted_sort(sub { length encode_utf8 $_ }, @strings);

It's not the most pretty of syntax but it sure beats the confusing Schwartzian
transform we had in the middle of our code before.  However, The anonymous
subroutine is jarring, and there's lots of extra brackets.  Ideally we'd like
to be able to call it like map where the subroutine looks just like a block of
code in the middle of our statement:

    #!perl
    my @sorted = weighted_sort { length encode_utf8 $_ } @strings;

Which isn't that hard to do.  If we specify a prototype for our subroutine
where the first argument is an anonymous subroutine (i.e. the C<&> prototype)
and the remaining arguments are a list (i.e. the C<@> prototype) like so:

    #!perl
    sub weighted_sort(&@) {
        ...
    }

Then Perl is smart enough to let us remove the surrounding C<()> and leave out
the C<sub> before and C<,> after the anonymous subroutine.  And then we have
what amounts to new syntax.  Wonderful!

=head2 The Debug Problem With New Syntax

The major problem with using anonymous subroutines to synthesize new syntax is
that they remain anonymous when we really need to know what they are - in
stack traces!

For example:

  #!perl
  my @sorted = weighted_sort { karma_rating($_, 2 ) } @stuff;

  sub nautghtyness_rating {
      print STDERR Devel::StackTrace->new if $DEBUG_NAUGHTYNESS;
      ...
  }

This prints out:

  Trace begun at karma.pl line 22
  main::karma_rating('1,2,3,4', 2) called at karma.pl line 19
  main::__ANON__ at karma.pl line 16
  main::weighted_sort('CODE(0x7fd91b02a240)', 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd') called at karma.pl line 19
  ...

Wait, that makes no sense.  What's this C<__ANON__> in the middle of our code?
Oh, right, that's the C<{ karma_rating($_, 2 ) }> subroutine.  Wouldn't it be
nice if this had a name?

=head2 Sub::Util to the rescue.

This is where Sub::Util steps in, allowing us to name the subroutine anything we
want:

  #!perl
  use Sub::Util qw(set_subname);

  sub weighted_sort(&@) {
      # the anonymous subroutine that calculates a weighting for whatever is
      # in $_
      my $weighter = set_subname("weighted_sort_weighting_block", shift);

      return 
          map  { $_->[0] }
          sort { $a->[1] <=> $b->[1] }
          map  { [$_, $weighter->() ] } @_;
  }

And now when we run our code we get this:

    Trace begun at karma.pl line 22
    main::karma_rating('a', 2) called at karma.pl line 19
    main::weighted_sort_weighting_block at karma.pl line 16
    main::weighted_sort('CODE(0x7f926b02f9b0)', 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd') called at karma.pl line 19
    ...

Which makes our stack traces that little bit more readable!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Sub::Util>
* L<Sub::Name>
* L<List::UtilsBy>
