Title: Process ALL the FILES!
Topic: Path::Class::Rule

=head1 There's More Than One Way to Find Files

=head2 File::Find

The very first release of perl 5 included L<File::Find>.  It provided a
mechanism for searching a file hierarchy for files and, presumably, doing stuff
with them.  You use it like this:

  #!perl
  use File::Find;

  find(
    {
      follow => 1, # follow symlinks
      wanted => sub {
        if (-d and $File::Find::dir =~ m{(?:^|/)tmp$}) {
          # skip tmp dirs everywhere, do not descend into them
          $File::Find::prune = 1;
          return;
        }

        return unless -s   > 1_000_000; # ignore small files
        return unless -M _ < 86_400;    # files not touched today

        process_big_file( $_ );
      },
    },
    '.', # start processing in cwd
  );

Simple, right?

Like many libraries that have their origins in the early days of Perl 5, its
interface can seem a bit weird today.  The usual complaint is that the
C<wanted> argument is not actually a test as to whether we want the file.  It's
a combination of testing for whether we want a file, whether we want to descend
into a directory, and doing whatever we want to do.

Oh, and the whole thing works with package variables and used to have a bunch
of problems with reentrancy.

=head2 File::Find::Rule

Quite a while ago, we got a much simpler API for doing this sort of thing in
L<File::Find::Rule>.  It let you build up a query that would find the files you
wanted, and then you could iterate over them doing stuff.  It got a nice
separation of "find" and "do," and as a bonus, threw in a lot of nice methods
for writing your query quickly.

We'd write the above something like this:

  #!perl
  use File::Find::Rule;

  my $rule = File::Find::Rule->new;
  $rule->or(
    $rule->new->directory->name( qr{(?:^|/)tmp$} )->prune->discard,
    $rule->new->size('>1000000')->exec(sub { -M < 86_400 })
  );

  my $iter = $rule->start('.');

  while (my $file = $iter->()) {
    process_big_file( $_ );
  }

This looks a lot simpler – at least to me.  There are a whole heap of extra
simple rules, too, and you can add your own.  I've used File::Find::Rule
happily for years, except for the one case where it becomes I<completely
intolerable>.  Allow me to demonstrate:

  #!code
  $ time perl -MFile::Find -e 'find({ wanted => sub { die $_ if -f $_ } }, "/")'
  0.03s user 0.01s system 70% cpu 0.045 total

This program takes nearly no time at all to run.  It starts looking for files
in F</>, finds something, and the C<wanted> coderef exits immediately.

  #!code
  $ time perl -MFile::Find::Rule -e 'my $iter = File::Find::Rule->start("/"); die $iter->()'
  ...
  ...
  ...
  (okay, I finally killed it)

File::Find::Rule actually compiles your rules down to use File::Find, but it
loses one of File::Find's key properties:  it is not lazy.  Even if you ask for
an iterator, it slurps up all the files, then iterates over that list.  If
you want to look through millions of files, this is just not going to cut it.

That doesn't mean you need to go back to File::Find, though.

=head2 Path::Class::Find

  #!code
  $ time perl -MPath::Class::Rule -e 'my $iter = Path::Class::Rule->new->file->iter("/"); die $iter->()'
  0.09s user 0.01s system 86% cpu 0.117 total

Okay, so it's fast.  What is it?

L<Path::Class::Find> is yet another file finder, with an interface very much
like that of File::Find::Rule, with two key differences:  it provides
L<Path::Class> objects instead of filename strings, and its iterator is
actually lazy.

We could write our search as:

  #!perl
  use Path::Class::Rule;

  my $rule = Path::Class::Rule->new;
  $rule->skip( $rule->new->directory->name( qr{(?:^|/)tmp$} ) );
  $rule->size('>1000000");
  $rule->and(sub { -M < 86_400 });

  my $iter = $rule->iter('.');

  while (my $file = $iter->()) {
    process_big_file( "$_" );
  }

There are a bunch of little differences between File::Find::Rule and
Path::Class::Rule, but it's worth getting over them so that when you need to
take your program and run it against that huge set of files you accidentally
let accumulate under F</var> because you thought that the other guy was taking
care of it (I mean, it's pretty much his responsibility, right?)... well, you
just want the program to work without having to read the whole filesystem into
memory first, right?

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Path::Class::Rule>
* L<Path::Class>
* L<File::Find>
* L<File::Find on the Perl Advent Calendar|http://www.perladvent.org/2000/16/>
* L<File::Find::Rule>
* L<File::Find::Rule on the Perl Advent Calendar|http://www.perladvent.org/2002/11th/>
* L<File::Next> - another file finder that is quite nice
