Title: Install Even Less
Topic: Pod::Cpandoc

=head1 Reading the Friendly Manual

So, when you want to just play around with a module,
L<local::lib|2011-12-01.html> is a good way to install libraries in a
quick, disposable way that doesn't affect your global development environment.
Sometimes, though, you don't even need to play around.  You just want to look
at the docs for the code someone suggested but that you haven't yet installed.

A lot of people would switch over to a web browser, but not me.  I'm used to
reading Perl documentation in the terminal, and reading it elsewhere ends up
giving me a confused feeling.  In the past, I used to just install the code (in
a local::lib compartment once I knew about it) and then run C<perldoc>.

Of course, some people I<prefer> reading their docs on the web.  There are
other tools for weirdos like that.  Me, I like C<L<cpandoc|Pod::Cpandoc>>!

C<cpandoc> works I<almost exactly> like C<perldoc>, with a big change that
makes it even better.  If C<cpandoc> can't find the library you asked for in
your system's Perl environment, it will get it – just the documentation – from
the CPAN and format that instead.

In other words:

  ~$ perldoc MooseX::Iterator
  No documentation found for "MooseX::Iterator".

Oh no!  Will I have to press Cmd-Tab and go to my web browser?  Or download the
library and look at its tarball's contents?  No!  I can just...

  ~$ cpandoc MooseX::Iterator
  [ ... and the pager runs, showing me the documentation! ]

Truth be told, though, this isn't where it shines for me.  I like that it
provides all the same options as C<perldoc>.  Specifically, it has the C<-m>
option, to view the source.  When someone on IRC has questions about how some
module they're trying to use works, I just run...

  ~$ cpandoc -m Some::Stupid::Module

...and I get the source of the code in question, whether or not I already have
it locally.

And, well, actually that's not true either.  Since C<cpandoc> is just like
C<perldoc>, I made a shell alias.  When I type C<perldoc> – as I always do,
since it's burned into my muscle memory – I get C<cpandoc> instead.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Pod::Cpandoc>
* L<Pod::Perldoc>
