Title: Keeping the Packages Neatly Wrapped Up
Topic: local::lib

=head1 Who the heck installed WWW::AdventCalendar on the server?

Imagine this not-exactly-hypothetical conversation:

  <Alice> Who the heck installed WWW::AdventCalendar on the server?
  <Bob>   I did.  Why?
  <Alice> We're trying to set up a new server just like it, and we found
          this installed, and it wants all kinds of crazy prerequisites.
          Why on Earth do we need this in production?
  <Bob>   Oh, we don't.  I just wanted to play around with it.
  <Alice> ...so you installed it globally?
  <Bob>   Well, how else was I going to play with it?

Now, I'm not going to defend Bob here, and say that he was just trying to use a
really cool program, or that he is a really decent coworker who only made this
mistake a couple times and other times comes in right on schedule and doesn't
make waves, or that he probably deserves some time off and a desk that isn't
right under the air conditioning vent.  None of that would be relevant.

I'm just going to say that sometimes it seems a lot easier to just globally
install some stupid library to play with it than to do something else.  After
all, what's the alternative?

Well, you can download the tarball, extract it, and so on, something like:

  #!code
  $ curl http://cpan.metacpan.org/authors/id/R/RJ/RJBS/WWW-AdventCalendar-1.102.tar.gz
  $ tar zxvf WWW-AdventCalendar-1.102.tar.gz
  $ cd WWW-AdventCalendar
  $ perl Makefile.PL
  [ ... ]
  $ make
  $ perl -I lib -MWWW::AdventCalendar -e '...'

Yes.  You can do that, but there are two problems.  First off, it's already
much, much more annoying than just:

  #!code
  $ cpanm WWW::AdventCalendar
  $ perl -MWWW::AdventCalendar -e '...'

Secondly, it won't work, anyway, because the C<[ ... ]> in my snippet above
would include things like missing prerequisites.  Lots of them.

Well, you could get each one in turn, and end up with a dozen C<-I> options on
your oneliner.  But that won't work either, because some of them will be XS
libraries, so they'll have compiled C code, so you'll need to use C<-Mblib>, and
who ever gets that working right across a bunch of paths?

So, C<cpanm> it is, right?

Yes, actually!

=head1 Look, Ma, no C<sudo>!

Of course, if you tried to use C<cpanm> as it stands, it will probably complain
that you don't have write permissions to C<@INC>, so you can't properly install
the library globally.  You can re-run as C<cpanm -S>, and you'll be prompted to
authenticate for C<sudo>.  Now everything installs nicely!  See, this is how
Bob gets himself in trouble.  He just wants things to work nicely.  Is that so
wrong?

Well, yes, probably.  Bob just needs to know how to make things work nicely
I<without putting crap in C</usr/local/lib/perl>>.

Actually, if you tried running C<cpanm> without telling it to authenticate to
install globally, you would've gotten this somewhat overwhelming message, which
you should not bother reading here:

  ! Can't write to /usr/pkg/lib/perl5/site_perl/5.8.0 and /usr/pkg/lib/perl5/site_perl/bin:
  ! Installing modules to /export/home/rjbs/perl5
  ! To turn off this warning, you have to do one of the following:
  !   - run me as a root or with --sudo option
  !     (to install to /usr/pkg/lib/perl5/site_perl/5.8.0 and /usr/pkg/lib/perl5/site_perl/bin)
  !   - run me with --local-lib option e.g. cpanm --local-lib=~/perl5
  !   - Set PERL_CPANM_OPT="--local-lib=~/perl5" environment variable (in your shell rc file)
  !   - Configure local::lib in your shell to set PERL_MM_OPT etc.

Did you read it by accident?  Sorry.  Instead, just finish reading this
aritcle.

What you really want to do is to get all the convenience of having a CPAN
client install a module, including all its prereqs, with one simple command,
into a compartment you can throw away when you're done.  This is exactly what
L<local::lib> is for.

  #!code
  $ eval `perl -Mlocal::lib=~/local/advcal`
  $ cpanm WWW::AdventCalendar
  [ ... ]
  38 distributions installed

local::lib adds a new set of directories to your Perl environment.  With a
local::lib in place, stuff installed from the CPAN will go into the local::lib,
affecting your current shell, but nothing else.  It's actually much better than
just learning how L<blib> works, because it will also update your C<$PATH> so
that programs installed by the libraries will work, too.  When you're done, you
can remove the directory and log out of the shell, and everything will be back
to normal.

You could also leave the directory around.  Most of the time, it would just sit
there doing nothing, but if you wanted to play around with the code in it
later, you could use the same local::lib invocation later to get that set of
directories back in action.

If you're really lazy, like me, you could write a little shell function to make
it even easier to turn on a local::lib:

  #!vim sh
  ll () { eval `perl -Mlocal::lib=$1` }

=head1 How does it work?

There is a lot of tricky handling of edge cases and special horrible things
inside local::lib, but for the most part it does something very simple.  If we
get rid of the shell C<eval>, you can see:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -Mlocal::lib=~/local/whatever
  Attempting to create directory /Users/rjbs/local/whatever
  export PERL_LOCAL_LIB_ROOT="/Users/rjbs/local/whatever";
  export PERL_MB_OPT="--install_base /Users/rjbs/local/whatever";
  export PERL_MM_OPT="INSTALL_BASE=/Users/rjbs/local/whatever";
  export PERL5LIB="/Users/rjbs/local/whatever/lib/perl5/darwin-2level:/Users/rjbs/local/whatever/lib/perl5";
  export PATH="/Users/rjbs/local/whatever/bin:$PATH";

After ensuring that directory exists (and possibly mentioning, on C<STDOUT>,
that it had to be created), local::lib prints out a bunch of lines that, if
executed in your shell, will set up environment variables that put the
directory into play.  It decides just what to print based on the shell you're
using, so C<csh> users will see C<setenv> instead of C<export>, and so on.

For example, the C<MM_OPT> environment variable tells L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> to
install inside the compartment.  C<MB_OPT> passes the same information to
L<Module::Build>.  C<PERL5LIB> acts like a C<use lib> statement at the top of
any Perl code you run.

You can have multiple local::lib compartments active at once:

  ~$ ll local/already-there
  Attempting to create directory /Users/rjbs/local/already-there

  ~$ ll local/second-lib
  Attempting to create directory /Users/rjbs/local/second-lib

  ~$ perl -Mlocal::lib=local/three
  Attempting to create directory /Users/rjbs/local/three
  export PERL_LOCAL_LIB_ROOT="$PERL_LOCAL_LIB_ROOT:/Users/rjbs/local/three";
  export PERL_MB_OPT="--install_base /Users/rjbs/local/three";
  export PERL_MM_OPT="INSTALL_BASE=/Users/rjbs/local/three";
  export PERL5LIB="/Users/rjbs/local/three/lib/perl5/darwin-2level:
  /Users/rjbs/local/three/lib/perl5:$PERL5LIB";
  export PATH="/Users/rjbs/local/three/bin:$PATH";

The most recently-added compartment is the installation target, but things in
the first two will still be there.

  ~$ echo $PATH
  /Users/rjbs/local/three/bin:/Users/rjbs/local/second-lib/bin:
  /Users/rjbs/local/already-there/bin:/Users/rjbs/bin:/usr/local/bin:
  /usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/opt/local/bin

If you want to take one compartment out of use, that's easy, too:

  ~$ perl -Mlocal::lib=--deactivate,local/second-lib
  export PERL_LOCAL_LIB_ROOT="/Users/rjbs/local/already-there:/Users/rjbs/local/three";
  export PATH="/Users/rjbs/local/three/bin:/Users/rjbs/local/already-there/bin:/Users/rjbs/bin:
  /usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/opt/local/bin";
  export PERL5LIB="/Users/rjbs/local/three/lib/perl5/darwin-2level:
  /Users/rjbs/local/three/lib/perl5:/Users/rjbs/local/already-there/lib/perl5/darwin-2level:
  /Users/rjbs/local/already-there/lib/perl5";

Of course, 99% of the time, I bet you'll just what the case I want:  C<ll> to
start using a local::lib and logging out to stop.

=head1 local::lib – the diagnostics

If you're like me, you're often thwarted by the overly-clever formatting done
by some version of GNU's man-reading toolchain.  It will turn "" into “” and
other such things.  This is particularly bad when it turns C<program -X> into
C<program –X> – if you didn't notice, that second one uses an emdash instead of
a hyphen.

To deal with people copying and pasting from man pages to the shell and having
this problem, local::lib has one of my favorite error handling blocks that I've
yet seen:

  #!perl
  if ($arg =~ /−/) {
    die <<'DEATH';
  WHOA THERE! It looks like you've got some fancy dashes in your commandline!
  These are *not* the traditional -- dashes that software recognizes. You
  probably got these by copy-pasting from the perldoc for this module as
  rendered by a UTF8-capable formatter. This most typically happens on an OS X
  terminal, but can happen elsewhere too. Please try again after replacing the
  dashes with normal minus signs.
  DEATH
  }

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<local::lib>

