Title: Keeping up with the Joneses
Topic: App::cpanoutdated

=head1 Restoring the Features of Yore

Back in the day, there were two choices for installing code from the CPAN:  the
original L<CPAN> client and L<CPANPLUS>.  Innovation in one kept driving the
other, and by the release of perl-5.10, both had sprouted all kinds of features
and usability enhancements.  They'd also gotten easier to use, but maybe not
easy enough.  When L<Miyagawa|https://metacpan.org/author/MIYAGAWA> released
L<App::cpanminus> (aka C<cpanm>), there was much rejoicing, and it's become
incredibly popular in its two short years of life.

One of the reasons that C<cpanm> has remained so easy to use is that it
jettisons huge numbers of the advanced features of C<CPAN> and C<CPANPLUS>.
Some of these are only needed for pretty exotic configurations like automated
testers or enterprise environments.  A few, though, were pretty useful for
everybody.  My favorite were probably the C<r> and C<upgrade> commands in the
CPAN shell.

C<r> (which as far as I know has no longer name) prints out a report on
installed modules that aren't the latest version.  For example, if I run it
right now, I see this:

  #!code
  cpan[1]> r
  CPAN: Storable loaded ok (v2.30)
  Reading '/Users/rjbs/.cpan/Metadata'
    Database was generated on Thu, 03 Nov 2011 03:30:30 GMT
  CPAN: Module::CoreList loaded ok (v2.57)

  Package namespace              installed    latest  in CPAN file
  Getopt::Lucid                      undef      0.19  DAGOLDEN/Getopt-Lucid-0.19.tar.gz
  AnyDBM_File                         1.00      1.01  FLORA/perl-5.15.4.tar.gz
  HTML::Mason::Apache::Request       undef         0  DROLSKY/HTML-Mason-1.47.tar.gz
  Number::Tolerant::Type::constant   undef     1.700  RJBS/Number-Tolerant-1.700.tar.gz
  PerlIO::scalar                      0.11      0.12  RJBS/perl-5.15.2.tar.bz2
  1224 installed modules have no parsable version number
  (use 'o conf show_unparsable_versions 1' to show them)

The C<upgrade> command finds the same list, but instead of just printing it
out, it installs all the new code.

These have several good uses.  The first one is obvious:  you can keep your
whole installed development environment up to date with the latest releases.
This is maybe a little crazy for your production environment, but if you're
installing to a L<local::lib|2011-12-01.html>, it's a great way to test your
code against a full upgrade.  It's also great for debugging.  When I get a bug
report that I can't reproduce, I often ask the reporting user to show me the
output of a report like this.  I compare it to mine, and half the time I
see a relevant different: the user has an older Moose, I have an older
Params::Validate, or something along those lines.

This kind of feature is great, but it's totally outside the realm of stuff that
C<cpanm> is ever going to do.  That doesn't mean we need to go back to the old
clients just yet, because L<Tokuhiro
Matsuno|https://metacpan.org/author/TOKUHIROM> wrote L<App::cpanoutdated>.  It
does the work of L<CPAN>'s C<r> command:

  #!code
  ~$ cpan-outdated
  Z/ZE/ZEFRAM/Devel-Declare-0.006008.tar.gz
  R/RJ/RJBS/Dist-Zilla-Plugin-CheckPrereqsIndexed-0.006.tar.gz
  G/GE/GETTY/HTTP-Body-1.14.tar.gz
  S/SM/SMUELLER/YAML-Syck-1.18.tar.gz
  M/MS/MSCHILLI/Log-Log4perl-1.34.tar.gz
  S/SM/SMUELLER/PAR-Dist-0.48.tar.gz
  R/RJ/RJBS/Test-Fatal-0.008.tar.gz
  S/SA/SADAHIRO/Unicode-Collate-0.84.tar.gz

This is a less information than the C<r> command.  It doesn't tell us what the
relevant module is, or what version we have installed, but it turns out that
this is generally enough.  It still tells you which dists are out of date,
which is just about as good as which modules.  (You also might note that it's a
different set of dists.  That's because I had to run these commands on
different installs, because I haven't kept my own C<cpan> working very well
since I switched to C<cpanm>!  That's all.)

It has another great property, too:  you can pipe the output of
C<cpan-outdated> to C<cpanm>.

  #!code
  ~$ cpan-outdated | cpanm
  [ … ]
  8 distributions installed
  ~$ cpan-outdated
  ~$

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<App::cpanoutdated>
* L<App::cpanminus>

