Title: All the perls are all lined up
Topic: App::perlbrew

=head1 I can test just what I want

I like to pretend that I can just target the latest stable release of C<perl>
and that's that.  It's what I run on my computers, after all.  Unfortunately,
at work, we have two different deployed versions, so I need to support those,
too.  But that's only two versions, right?

Well, not really.  The problem is that I release as much of my code as seems
reasonable to the CPAN, and that means I get bug reports from lots of different
versions.  My least favorite five words?  "It doesn't work on 5.8.1."  (You may
be thinking, "Why 5.8.1 and not 5.6.1?"  Well, because if it's 5.6.1, I'll
usually send condolences instead of bugfixes.)

So, what do I do when I get that bug report?  If it looks like a plausible bug
(and not an obvious user error), my next action is almost always to see whether
I can reproduce it.  If the bug really is just in 5.8.1, and I can't reproduce
it in my 5.14.1, or the 5.8.8 readily available on some other box sitting
around, I'll have to buck up and install 5.8.1.

The last thing I want, though, is to end up with a zillion C<perl5.x.y>
binaries in my path, each partially sharing its library paths, different
installs of this or that being alternately shared or not shared between
interpreters.  It's pretty easy to get that with the right arguments to the
F<Configure> program that builds C<perl> – oh, and right.  I'd have to I<run>
the F<Configure> program, build, test, install, and so on.  Some versions would
need patches to build on my OS X box.  What a drag.

Fortunately, I am free from having to suffer through any of this, because I can
use C<L<perlbrew|http://perlbrew.pl>> from
L<gugod|https://metacpan.org/author/GUGOD>.  It manages a bunch of parallel
Perl installs.  If you're familiar with Ruby's
C<L<rvm|http://beginrescueend.com/>>, then you already know what C<perlbrew>
is, more or less.

If you don't, here's how you get started – we'll talk about how you use it in a
bit, if you're not sure you want to install it, but you can trust me: you do.

=begin :list

1. install App::perlbrew with your favorite CPAN client (cpan, cpanp, cpanm, ppm, whatever)

2. run C<perlbrew init>

This will print out a big friendly message saying what it did, and it will
include one key line, something like:

  source ~/perl5/perlbrew/etc/bashrc

3. add that C<source> line to your F<~/.bashrc> or F<.zshrc> or whatever

Now when you open a new shell, it will look for stuff installed into
C<perlbrew>-managed Perl environment instead of the global system environment
first.

4. run C<perlbrew install perl-5.14.2>

Now C<perlbrew> will start doing the first hunk of boring that you're getting
to avoid:  configuring, building, testing, and installing C<perl> v5.14.2.  If
it knows that it will have to patch the source to compile (by using
L<Devel-PatchPerl|https://metacpan.org/release/Devel-PatchPerl>, it will.  It
will give the C<perl> its I<entirely self-contained> set of C<@INC> libraries,
install paths, and so on.  I<No libraries> are getting shared with your system
C<perl>, and it won't leak the other way, either.

5. do something fun while it compiles

Or, if you think it's fun, you can tail the log file – C<perlbrew> will have
told you its path – to see how the build is going.

6. open a new shell (or run that C<source> line in this one)

7. run C<perlbrew switch perl-5.14.2> to make it your active perl

8. run C<perl -v> and rejoice

(Remember that if you just sourced that file in an existing shell like C<zsh>,
you might need to run C<rehash>!)

=end :list

So, great, you have C<perl>.  So what?

Well, go ahead and repeat steps 4 through 8, picking another version.  You'll
end up with several installed Perl environments, each with its own libraries.
Not only that, but you'll have C<cpanm> preinstalled.  So, someone told you
that your Awesome::Library is busted on 5.8.9?

  #!code
  $ perlbrew switch perl-5.8.9
  $ cpanm -v Awesome::Library

...and you'll see the build process occur right there in your own 5.8.9
install.

I<One warning>:  trying this out, you may find some versions won't compile for
you.  Not every version still compiles cleanly with modern libraries and tools.
PatchPerl, included with C<perlbrew> should take care of this, but it doesn't
handle everything.  For example, on Mac OS X 10.7, probably only 5.14.2 will
compile.  These tend to get addressed eventually, but it won't ever be perfect.

You can install more than one copy of any given perl, too.  Maybe you want to
have different sets of libraries installed – although really you could just use
L<local::lib|http://perladvent.org/2011/2011-12-01.html> for that.  Maybe,
though, you want the same version with different options.  These are all
useful:

  perlbrew install perl-5.14.2 -Dusethreads --as threaded-5.14.2

  perlbrew install perl-5.14.2 -DDEBUGGING --as debug-5.14.2

...and you probably want to know that C<-j> works to make and test in parallel:

  perlbrew install -j 5 perl-5.14.2

=head1 Take your perl and roll it back

If you really need to make C<which perl> start returning your old global perl
or its installed programs – which should probably never happen – you can get
C<perlbrew> out of the way with C<perlbrew off>.

Of course, you probably don't need to do this.  If you've got C<perl> installed
for your system at F</usr/bin/perl> you can just put that in the shebang lines
as needed.  You can run C</usr/bin/perl $(which cpanm)> when you need to
install things to the global install, and so on.  Almost certainly, though,
you'll quickly find that you don't need to muck with it nearly at all.

More likely, you'll start finding that you've got personal scripts that are
using the system perl in their shebang, but your library updates are now going
to perlbrew.  That's easy to fix, and you do some nice simple things this way.
For example, you can write this:

  #!perl
  #!/home/rjbs/perl5/perlbrew/perls/perl-5.14.2/bin/perl
  use 5.14.1;

  use local::lib '/home/rjbs/.perlbrew/lib/safe';

  ...

First of all, you've spelled out exactly what version of C<perl> to use, and
that won't go away when you install a new version -- it will stay there,
working correctly, until you get everything working on 5.16 and (maybe) decide
to delete your C<perl>.

Secondly, you've decided to use a local::lib to keep the safe versions of all
the libraries you're going to use.  Why is it under F<~/.perlbrew>?  Because
C<perlbrew> can manage your local::lib compartments, too:

  #!code
  $ perlbrew switch perl-5.14.2
  $ perlbrew lib create safe
  $ perlbrew switch perl-5.14.2@safe
  $ cpanm install Something::Cool

In other words, we:

=for :list
1. pick the perl for we want a local::lib
2. create a local::lib compartment called "safe" for that perl
3. switch to using it
4. install Something::Cool into it

There are some limitations, here.  We can only have one active compartment at a
time and we can't re-use a compartment across two versions (even if we think it
will be safe).  Still, those are unlikely cases, and the base case is very,
very useful.

=head1 Doesn't it make your life better?

It's hard to explain how much simpler C<perlbrew> can make testing of Perl
code.  It's not just testing, either.  Obviously, this makes it easier to
upgrade your code to a new version without having to go whole hog or have
multiple versions installed in a single F<bin> dir.  It lets you keep your one
stupid-but-vital ancient tool working on 5.6 while the rest of your work is
getting done on 5.14.

Finally, even if you only ever use it for one C<perl>, it takes away a bunch of
the headache of installing C<perl> and later libraries by doing all the
configuration for you and putting everything into directories into which you
can write, without C<sudo> or local::lib.

You will not regret using C<perlbrew>.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<App::perlbrew> on the CPAN
* the L<perlbrew home page|http://www.perlbrew.pl/>

