Title: Stupid Command Line Tricks
Topic: the -M switch

=head1 The Basics of C<-M>

C<perl> understands a bunch of command line switches.  Some of them, like
C<-f>, you will probably never use.  Others, like C<-e> and C<-d>, you might
use all the time.  The C<-M> switch is somewhere in between.  You might use it
in the most trivial case, but it can probably do a lot more than you know it
can.

The general use case is this:

  #!code
  perl -MCarp::Always::Color some-script.pl

The general effect is that "C<use Carp::Always::Color;>" is injected at the
beginning of the program to be run, as if it had been in the source itself.
It's great for things that affect the global execution environment, like
L<Carp::Always|2011-12-04.html>, but it's got a bunch of other little uses.

=head2 Importing

If you want to write a one-liner that needs an import, for example, you can use
the equals sign:

  #!code
  perl -MList::Util=first -E 'say first { /rjbs/ } @INC'

The string after the C<=> is passed to List::Util's C<import> routine.  If it
has commas, the string is split on commas and the result is passed in.

This is how L<local::lib|2011-12-01.html>'s one-liner form works!  local::lib
has a tricky C<import> routine, and you pass it a path name by using C<-M…=…>

  #!code
  perl -Mlocal::lib=~/local/testing

By default, C<import> is called with no arguments, because libraries given to
the C<-M> switch are loaded with C<use Module;>.  You can skip the imports by
using C<-m> instead.  C<-mMODULE> becomes C<use Module ();>.

=head2 Version Checks

Usually, if I want to know what version(s) of a module I have installed, I run
L<which_pm>, but when I don't have it – or more likely, when giving advice to
someone on IRC, I can use C<-M>.  If I think someone's seeing a bug because
they've got an old version of Sub::Exporter, I can tell them to run:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -MSub::Exporter\ 999
  Sub::Exporter version 999 required--this is only version 0.982.
  BEGIN failed--compilation aborted.

=head2 C<no MODULE>

Most of the time, we load libraries with C<use>, but C<L<no|perlfunc/no>> is
useful, too.  (Instead of calling C<import>, it calls C<unimport>.)  Mostly,
C<no> is used by libraries that are loaded to forbid undesirable behavior.
L<indirect> lets you ban indirect method invocation.  L<circular::require> lets
you ban circular module loading.

In your source for F<Foo.pm>, you might write:

  #!perl
  use strict;
  use warnings;
  no circular::require;

  use Bar; # if Bar tries to "use Foo", we'll die because of no circular::require

...but circular::require affects the global behavior of C<require>.  You
probably don't want to always load it everywhere.  You just want to use it
sometimes when testing.  You can't say C<-Mcircular::require>, because that
would use C<use> instead of C<no>.  To get C<no>, just throw in another dash:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -M-circular::require -MFoo -e0

The code above will be silent if Foo has no circular requirements, and emit a
string of warnings of it has them.

=head1 Further Madness

So, for testing versions, I showed:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -MString::Truncate\ 999

For importing, I showed:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -MString::Truncate=trunc,elide -e '...'

What if we want to combine these?  They're not really compatible.  What if we
want to pass something more complex than a list of strings?  The bits after the
equals sign aren't C<eval>ed, so they can't be complex.

The secret lies in understanding how that version-testing code worked.
The space after "String::Truncate" and everything following that is just tacked
into the template C<use MODULE REST ;>

This means you can put I<almost anything> there.  Do you want to import a
renamed version of C<trunc>, but only if you have a recent version?

  #!code
  ~$ perl -M'String::Truncate 1.100000 trunc => { -as => "truncate" }' -e ...

Your program will be run with the following line of code prepended:

  #!perl
  use String::Truncate 1.1000 trunc =>{ -as => "truncate" };

This is where it gets a little nutty:  C<perl> doesn't care whether you give it
more than one statement.  You can put all kinds of stuff in C<-M>'s argument.
In fact, if the stuff you want to put in is important, but the module isn't,
you can just use something meaningless like C<5>:

  #!code
  ~$ perl -M'5; warn "pid: $$\n"' your-actual-program.pl

The C<use 5> just ensures that you're under Perl 5 or later, and then the code
you actually wanted to inject is added.

C<-M> is a powerful tool for all kinds of code injection when you don't want to
actually start editing the code you're running.  Even better, once you've
finished working with it, you can just delete your shell history file, and
nobody will know the kind of horrible things you did with it.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<perlrun>
* C<L<use|perlfunc/use>>
* C<L<no|perlfunc/no>>
* L<Module::Which>
