=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 5

=for advent_title Better not fault, better not die()

=for advent_author Yanick Champoux

Everyone knows about Santa's Naughty or Nice list.  Few lists are
more revered, nor feared, than this one.  For some of us, it led
to the most wonderful surprises and cherished childhood memories.
For others... well, let's just say that it was instrumental 
in the stockpiling of
enough fossil fuel to keep us warm throughout the winter
(and then some).


What few people know, though, is that the List stopped
being scalable many years ago.  With so many kids,
and the Niceness matrix constantly growing in complexity, 
it was only a question of time before the North Pole scribes
would lose the fight.
So, once it became clear that the good ol' ways wouldn't do anymore,
the big Ho-Ho-Honcho put his foot down and 
mandated the IT elves to overhaul the whole 
process.  

And they did.  As it turned out, they elected
to base their solution
on M<Test::Harness> and the whole 
Perl testing infrastructure.  In the span of a few months,
through the sheer might of their merry hacking,  they
turned the quaint paper-based list of yore into a lean, mean, 
database server farm-backed machine.  Now, the dirt could
be gathered on all the children in the blink of an eye:

=begin pre

    ok 1 - Li'l Timmy has been nice
    ok 2 - Li'l Timmy ate his/her veggies
    ok 3 - Li'l Timmy off to bed before 19:30
    ok 4 - Li'l Timmy has not been pouting
    ok 5 - Li'l Timmy has not been grouchy
    not ok 6 - Li'l Dennis has been nice
    not ok 7 - Li'l Dennis ate his/her veggies
    ok 8 - Li'l Dennis off to bed before 19:30
    ok 9 - Li'l Dennis has not been pouting
    ok 10 - Li'l Dennis has not been grouchy
    ok 11 - Li'l Linus has been nice
    ok 12 - Li'l Linus ate his/her veggies
    ok 13 - Li'l Linus off to bed before 19:30
    ok 14 - Li'l Linus has not been pouting
    ok 15 - Li'l Linus has not been grouchy
    ok 16 - Li'l Lucy has been nice
    ok 17 - Li'l Lucy ate his/her veggies
    ok 18 - Li'l Lucy off to bed before 19:30
    ok 19 - Li'l Lucy has not been pouting
    not ok 20 - Li'l Lucy has not been grouchy

=end pre


Pretty proud of their system, the elves went and 
presented it to 
the Big Man.  Unfortunately, and as it is well-documented in songs, 
Santa's a busy man he has no time to play. And having millions of 
stockings to fill on Christmas day makes one
a firm believer in executive summaries.  So it's understandable that
Father Christmas wasn't totally sold to the elves' solution.
"I don't care if they're sleeping," he snapped, 
"I don't care if they're awake,
I just want to know if they've been good, FOR GOODNESS' SAKE!"

Back to the drawing board the elves scurried. Would
they have to rewrite their infrastructure from scratch?
Could this unforeseen churn jeopardize Christmas' delivery date? 
It turned out they didn't need to, and -- heavens be thanked -- it wouldn't. For one of the
lead develfpers thought of using M<Test::Group> to bundle each child's
tests into a single all-niceness-encompassing one. 

=begin pre

    ok 1 - Li'l Timmy
    not ok 2 - Li'l Dennis
    ok 3 - Li'l Linus
    not ok 4 - Li'l Lucy

=end pre

This was much more to Santa's liking and, boys and girls, this is still
the system that the North Pole use to this very day...

=begin eds

Note to kiddies for 2008/2009 -- Bedtime niceness is an Average. Going to bed at sundown may save it at the last minute. Niceness and bedtime have some slack but vegetables, grouchy, pouting are seemingly Zero tolerance, so be careful!  -- The Mgt

=end eds

=head2 Before

=sourcedcode mod5a.pl

=head2 After

=sourcedcode mod5b.pl

=head2 DB Mock Object

=sourcedcode ChildrenDB.pm

