=pod

=for advent_year 2008

=for advent_day 14

=for advent_title L-HO-HO-HO-st in translation

=for advent_author Yanick Champoux

There's no doubt about it, Santa has the glorious part of the job. Riding
through the sky in his pimped-out reindeer sled, distributing gifts, reaping
love, getting offered cookies and milk wherever he goes.

But this is only the bright, shiny tip of the North Pole Celebration
Manufacturing Machine. There's a full year of labor that hides behind the Big
Red One 24 hours of eggnog-scented glory. Thousands of unsung elves toil on
hundred of tasks to make it happen.

One of those crucial tasks is the processing of all Christmas letters. After
all, a big part of the magic of Christmas is how Santa Claus always bring the
perfect gift (although the system can experience glitches from time to time,
as the piles of tube socks I've collected through the years can attest
to). There can be no cheating done there, no easy way out: each letter has to
be parsed, processed, groked and entered in the big gift database.

If having to process a heap of mail the size of mount Everest wasn't enough,
one has to factor in that those letters are written in all languages, and more
often than not peppered with the wonderfully cute spelling mistakes that is
the hallmark of six year olds all over the world.

As more and more scribe elves are cracking under the pressure, Santa decided
that it was time to call the IT elves (and Perl) to the rescue. He gave them
the task to come with a system that would take the transcript of a child's
letter, figure out in which language it's written, run it through a quick
spellcheck and then translate it to something all elves can read; which
happens to be English, thanks to the Polar population's addiction to Sesame
Street.

As it had been reported on the A<http://perladvent.pm.org/2008/4/|4th> and
A<http://perladvent.pm.org/2008/13/|13th>, the IT elves already succeeded in
implementing the first two steps of Santa's masterplan. The only part left 
to be done was the translation.

The module to do the job, M<Lingua::Translate>, was found pretty quickly. Since
it provides an interface to online translation services, it was the perfect way
to outsource the always-thorny problem of translation to someone more qualified
for the job. But the question remained, which of the many available backends
should be used? The distribution itself provides <tt>::Babelfish</tt> &amp;
<tt>::SysTran</tt>, but M<Lingua::Translate::InterTran> and
M<Lingua::Translate::Google> were also available. 
In a thoroughly unscientific effort to determine which was best,
they had a sesquilingual intern feed each the same sample letter:


<table><tr><td colspan="2">

I<Original letter:>

=begin pre

  Cher Papa Noel,

  Comme cadeau, je veux un gros camion jaune.

  Bisoux,
  Martin

=end pre

</td></tr><tr><td>

I<Babelfish translation:>

=begin pre

  Dear Papa Christmas,

  Like gift, I want a large truck yellow.

  Bisoux,
  Martin

=end pre

</td><td>

I<SysTran translation:>

=begin pre


  # No SysTran server available.
  # Next year's wish list?
  #
  # &mdash;Glugg


=end pre

</td></tr><tr><td>

I<Google translation:>

=begin pre

  Dear Papa Noel, 

  As a gift, I want a big yellow truck. 

  Bisoux, 
  Martin

=end pre

</td></td>

I<InterTran translation:>

=begin pre

  Dear Dad Noel, 

  As freebie, I want to a big lorry yellow. 

  Bison, 
  Martial 

=end pre

</td></tr></table>

Of course, the number of languages each service supports is also important,
but unfortunately the implementations of the method intended to report this
information C<available> varied in quality. More frustratingly, this method
required the creation of a disposable object in order to be checked.
Nevertheless, based on this preliminary test run, the elves agreed that the
Google backend looked like the most promising candidate, and plugged it in
to the prototype script.

Rumors are that, next year, the IT staff is looking at hooking an optical
character recognition engine into the script to do away with the re-typing
of the letters. The postal elves can barely wait!

=sourcedcode mod14.pl
