Title:  It's Over!
Topic:  Perl Advent 2011
Author: Ricardo Signes <rjbs@cpan.org>

=encoding utf8

=head1 Merry Christmas from PerlAdvent.pm

Well, yesterday was the final day of our Advent calendar, and hopefully
everyone enjoyed it!  Now it's Christmas and I'm off to enjoy some time with
family, friends, and new toys.

As always, the Perl Advent Calendar is a group effort, and I'd like to thank
everyone who contributed this year: brian d foy, Cory G Watson, David Golden,
David Wheeler, Jesse Luehrs, Piers Cawley, and Shawn M Moore.  If you'd like to
contribute an article for next year, you've got just about 365 days to do it!
Lucky for you, 2012 is a leap year, and you'll get an extra day for planning.

If you want to help with the site or other things in the meantime, you can
<s>L<join our mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent></s> L<visit
the perl-advent/Perl-Advent GitHub repo|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent> where
we'll be talking about work that needs to get done on things like the FAQ, the
site generator, and all that sort of thing.  You can find the L<site's contents
on GitHub|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent>, which I<should> contain the
2011 articles by the time you see this.  It's not exactly how it should be, but
it's there.

So until I'm back at Christmas 2012 – if I don't come to my senses and quit
this job – have a merry Christmas and an excellent new year!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<the perl-advent/Perl-Advent GitHub repo|https://github.com/perladvent/Perl-Advent/>
* L<the someday-to-be-rewritten FAQ|http://www.perladvent.org/FAQ.html>
* L<the mailing list|http://mail.pm.org/mailman/listinfo/perladvent> (historical archive)
