Title: All Your Documentation, Even Offline
Topic: Perldoc::Server

=encoding utf8

=head1 C<perldoc.perl.org>

A few years ago, L<Jon Allen|http://search.cpan.org/~jonallen/> set up
C<L<perldoc.perl.org|http://perldoc.perl.org>>, a site where you could browse
the core Perl 5 documentation.  A few sites existed for this kind of thing,
including C<search.cpan.org>, but Jon's site blew the doors off of them.  It
had good search, nice styling, syntax highlighting, and lots of other little
details that made it fantastic.  It kept getting better, but the big question
people kept asking was, "When can I run my own?"  (Some people prefer to read
all their documentation in the terminal, but these people are weirdos and can
use L<different tools|http://perladvent.org/2011/2011-12-15.html> for that.)

Even with the Internet available almost anywhere, being able to work offline is
a huge win.  If your key reference materials – like the documentation of your
programming language itself – go from being nicely available offline (via
C<L<cpandoc|http://perladvent.org/2011/2011-12-15.html>>) to only being
available when you can access web pages, you're in line for some hard times.
Having the man pages available as HTML is really tempting, though.  Not only do
they look quite nice, but their interlinking becomes very useful.
L<Pod|perlpod> is a format with decent facilities for linking to other
documents, but the C<perldoc> makes those links pretty worthless.  In HTML,
they become an asset.

Fortunately for everyone who was desperate to get hooked on the perldoc server,
Jon soon released L<Perldoc::Server>.  Not only did it let you run your own
copy of C<perldoc.perl.org>, but it went even further.  It serves up nicely
formatted web pages for all the documentation of all modules you've got
installed in your Perl environment.

It's easy to see how it all works:

  #!code
  $ eval `perl -Mlocal::lib=~/local/perldoc`
  $ cpanm Perldoc::Server
  …
  29 distributions installed
  $ perldoc-server
  …
  Now listening on http://localhost:7375/

...and you can fire up your web browser, hit that URL, and see all the docs in
your C<@INC> presented in glorious HTML.

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Perldoc::Server>
* L<Pod::Cpandoc>
* L<Pod::Perldoc>
