Title: Now I have an SQL machine gun
Topic: DBIx::RunSQL
Author: David Golden <dagolden@cpan.org>

=head1 Where do you keep your SQL?

Do you use a database with Perl?  I don't mean one of those new-fangled No-SQL
ones; I mean one of those SQL classics.  You do?  Where do you keep your SQL?

You've got an ORM, check! You've got abstractions to hide your queries, check!
But do you have any SQL lying around in files?  Maybe your schema?  Maybe
you've got several different schemas?  Different versions?  Maybe ones for
testing?  Maybe for different database engines? (Thank you
L<SQL::Translator>!)

=head1 How do you run your SQL?

Do you use the command line client for each database?  Do you remember the
syntax for each one?  If you run SQL from automated tests, do you always use
the same type of database?  Do you use the same connection parameters?  Or
do you mix it up?

If you're the type of person who like to keep things DRY ("don't repeat
yourself"), then doing things I<one> way for SQL code with command line tools
and then I<another> way in your Perl code probably drives you crazy.

=head1 Why not just use DBI, instead?

L<DBIx::RunSQL> is your SQL machine gun.  It takes an SQL file, chops it
up into statements, and fires them at your database through good, old L<DBI>.
You probably don't want to do that for a database dump with a million
INSERT statements, but for schemas, it's B<great>!

Here's an example adapted from the synopsis to initialize a new database
for testing.  First, we drop our schema into F<sql/create.sql>:

  #!vim sql
  CREATE TABLE chapters (
    chapterid int(10) NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
    longtitle char(80) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
    shorttitle char(40) NOT NULL DEFAULT ''
  );

  CREATE TABLE deletes (
    deleteid char(255) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
    changed char(10) DEFAULT NULL,
    changedby char(10) DEFAULT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (deleteid)
  );

  CREATE TABLE distmtimes (
    dist char(128) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
    distmtime char(10) DEFAULT NULL,
    distmdatetime datetime NOT NULL DEFAULT '0000-00-00 00:00:00',
    indexing_at datetime DEFAULT NULL,
    indexed_at datetime DEFAULT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (dist)
  );

...and probably in reality we've got quite a few more tables to create.  The we read in the SQL and fire it off:

  #!perl
  use DBIx::RunSQL;

  my $dbh = DBIx::RunSQL->create(
      dsn     => 'dbi:SQLite:dbname=:memory:',
      sql     => 'sql/create.sql',
  );

  # Now use $dbh as your database handle for testing

You can also reuse an existing DBI handle:

  #!perl
  my $dbh = connect_to_db();

  for my $file ( list_of_schema_file() ) {
    DBIx::RunSQL->run_sql_file(
        dbh     => $dbh,
        sql     => $file,
    );
  };

There you go.  Now you can keep your SQL files, but execute them from inside
your Perl code with the connection you already have.  Ho-Ho-Ho!

=head1 SEE ALSO

=for :list
* L<DBIx::RunSQL>
* L<SQL::Translator>
