Title: Christmas Tree Babbles
Topic: Babble
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

Yesterday's exercise in getting a script runnable on an older version of
perl had introduced the elves to App::sigfix, a tool that could transform
their source code so that the subroutine signatures they'd been using
would be removed and replaced with shim code that could allow their
transformed code to run on older versions of perl.

App::sigfix was just the forerunner of several similar tools that they were
starting to learn about and take advantage of.

=head2 Babel

As much as the elves loved Perl, they, like most programmers, actually coded
in several languages.  One of their most used was JavaScript.  JavaScript as
a programming language has evolved over the years, but if it still has to run
on older webbrowsers the code that is served on the webserver has to be
written in the old and outdated dialet of JavaScript.

To help with this in the JavaScript world they have a tool called
L<Babel|https://babeljs.io/>.  Babel is able to translate modern idiomatic
ES6 style JavaScript code like this:

    #!vim javascript
    ($ => $(() => {
        const foo = $('#foo')
        foo.on('click', () => console.log('foo'))
    }))(jQuery)

Into more traditional JavaScript like this:

    #!vim javascript
    (function ($) {
        return $(function () {
            var foo = $('#foo');
            foo.on('click', function () {
                return console.log('foo');
            });
        });
    })(jQuery);

Typically this is run with a tool like gulp whenever the JavaScript file is
saved (or whatever other flavor of the month is in vogue in the JavaScript world
this week), producing a shippable version that can be tested in the browser.

=head2 Babble

Babble is a Perl framework for essentially doing the same thing - taking
Perl code and transpiling it into Perl code that can run on older
versions of perl.

It can run in various modes.  For example, it can run in a kind of Just in
Time mode where the source code is transformed on the client computer
(Babble itself along with its non-core dependancies is written in pure Perl
code suitable for running on very old versions of perl):

    #!perl
    #!/usr/bin/perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    # enable the ::DefinedOr filter to change all the //
    use Babble::Filter qw(::DefinedOr);

    my $name = shift() // "World";
    print "Hello $name\n";

The Babble::Filter command transforms the source code as it's executed
so this code will run versions of perl that don't support the defined-or
operator C<//>.  In fact, the code that perl will see when it executes
the script will actually look like this:

    #!perl
    #!/usr/bin/perl

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    # enable the ::DefinedOr filter to change all the //
    use Babble::Filter qw(::DefinedOr);

    my $name = (map +(defined($_) ? $_ : "World"), shift ())[0];
    print "Hello $name\n";

Which isn't the most readable code...but it's not designed for you, it's
designed for very old versions of perl!

=head2 Source Filters?

Perl has had source filters for countless years now, modules that can
programatically alter the source code as perl compiles.  What makes Babble so
different?

Normally source filters work by applying a dumb regular expression to the
source code.  They search for a matching string and then replace it with
something else.  They have no idea of the context the string is being used
in - for example, if the string is in the middle of a string or heredoc - so
are often fooled into doing the wrong thing.  Worse, multiple source filters
don't play well together - source filter A doesn't like the unfiltered input
designed to be processed by source filter B, and source filter B doesn't
like the unfiltered input designed to be processed by source filter A.

Under the hood Babble uses L<PPR>, a set of grammars for the Perl programming
language.  This solves the context problem - rather than searching for a string
to replace in isolation, Babble matches the entire document.  Babble plugins
are also able to play together so you can have multiple plugins transforming
the same source;  A Babble plugin works by changing the way the grammer is
matched and interpreted, meaning essentially Babble ends up transforming the
source for all plugins together rather than forcing one plugin to deal with
the input for another.

=head2 Shipping Transformed Code

Earlier I mentioned that you can run Babble in different modes.  What's the
other option?

Rather than having Babble transform the code in Just In Time mode, you can
transpile the source code on your local machine and then ship that transfomed
code to the end user.  This has the advantage that your end user doesn't have to
have to install the Babble infrastructure, and it'll speed up startup time for
your script.

Transformation of source code is easy:

    perl -MBabble::Filter=::DefinedOr -pe babble hello.pl

Since very early versions of perl 5, Perl 5 has had the ability to use C<.pmc>
files.  If a C<.pmc> file is located in the same directory as a C<.pm> file
then perl will load the C<.pmc> file in preference to the C<.pm> file -
meaning it's possible to ship I<Perl module compiled> code that you've
created with Babble alongside the original source code.

    perl -MBabble::Filter=::DefinedOr -pe babble MyModule.pm > MyModule.pmc

Of course, running the above command for each module you want to ship will
get tedious soon, and is an error prone technique (you're likely forget
once and ship a C<.pmc> that's not a transformed version of the C<.pm>)  What
you need is a build system that handles all of this for you.

The most popular module build system for Perl L<Dist::Zilla> is able to
support Babble with the L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::Babble> plugin.  Simply
add the following to your C<dist.ini>

    [Babble]
    plugin = ::DefinedOr

And now whenever you execute C<dzil build> Babble will do the transformation
for you.

=head2 What's Possible with Babble today?

Babel is very much an experimental tool, and as such should be treated with
extreme care.  On an experimental basis Babble can do a bunch of things
today:

=over

=item Babble::Plugin::CoreSignatures

Bring support for subroutine signatures to older versions of perl.

=item Babble::Plugin::DefinedOr

Bring support for defined-or (C<//>) to older versions of perl.

=item Babble::Plugin::PostfixDeref

Bring support for postfix derefencing (C<< ->*% >> and C<< ->*@ >>) to older
versions of perl.

=item Babble::Plugin::State

Bring support for the C<state> keyword to older versions of perl.

=item Babel::Plugin::SKT

Bring support for the C<try> and C<catch> syntax from L<Syntax::Keyword::Try>
without the Syntax::Keyword::Try module.  Especially useful for older versions
of perl that don't support the pluggable syntax system that Syntax::Keyword::Try
relies upon and it can't be installed on.

=item Babble::Plugin::SubstituteAndReturn

Bring support for subsituion regular expressions returning the changes rather
than altering their input (C<s///r>) to older versions of perl.

=back

=head2 Back at the North Pole

With Babble the elves were able to ship even more of their code to run on third
party servers - even those that only supported the ancient perl 5.8. Sure,
Babble was experimental, but since the elves were able to do the transformation
on the systems they controlled and test the code before they shipped it they had
every confidence that what they shipped would work come Christmas Eve.