Title: The Fix Is In
Topic: App::Sigfix
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

=encoding utf8

One of the distinct advantages of writing code at the north pole is that
Santa's elves always deployed the latest versions of perl to their
production servers.  This meant that the elves were able to make use of
the latest Perl features to make their day easier.

In fact, the elves had gone one step further and become additcted to the new
subroutine signatures feature of Perl - most of the younger elves would refuse
to program without it.  While still technically an experimental feature, it'd
been available since seeminly forever (as of this Christmas it'd been available
not only in the latest major release of perl, but also in the old maintenance
release before that, and in the now deprecated major release before I<that>, the
now deprecated major release before I<that too>, and even the now deprecated
major release before I<that as well>...you get the idea.)

Not only had subroutine signatures been around I<forever>, but they made writing
the code I<so> much nicer.  Rather than writing something complicated like this:

    #!perl
    sub fetch_reindeer {
        my $self = shift;
        my $name = shift or die "Missing argument!";
        die "Extra argument" if @_;

        ...
    }

The elves only had to write this:

    #!perl
    use experimental 'signatures';

    sub fetch_reindeer ($self, $name) {
       ...
    }

Which was why it was such a shock when they suddenly found themselves unable
to use them.

=head2 Time Waits For No Man (or Elf)

It'd probably been a mistake outsourcing hosting some of the application code to
an organization not so full of the the Christmas spirit.  But Santa's operation
was the definition of a seasonal business, and they'd just run out of capacity.

"Our rules of conduct say you're not allowed to use any experimental features at
all.  And while you're in our house, you follow our rules", Father Time said.
Being the embodiment of 2018 by December he'd changed from the young baby he'd
been back in January into the grouchy old man that was enforcing the pointless
rules today.

There was nothing for it.  The elves would have to go through all their code and
rip out the subroutine signatures, replacing them with older style code.  What a
lot of work! And it's not like they were on a hard deadline or anything!

=head2 A fix!

One of the virtues of a Perl programmer is laziness.  In particular, never doing
by hand what you can get a computer to do for you.

The elves considered writing a Perl program to go through all their Perl code
and remove all the signatures and insert comparable code.  This, of course,
would probably be a Hard problem.  Traditionally parsing Perl code is one of the
hardest things a Perl program can do, with its user friendly (but not
necessarily compiler friendly) syntax making it a collection of nasty edge
cases.  The question is would the elves be prepared to put in the hard work to
be sufficiently lazy?

Luckily the Wise Old Elf had been to The Perl Conference in Glasgow this year
and had heard about a tool that could help them: L<App::sigfix>.

C<sigfix> is a command line program that you can run against your Perl code.
It'll parse the source code, find signatures, and then transform them into
code that executes on older versions of perl.  For example given our
C<ReindeerFactory> code:

    #!perl
    package ReindeerFactory;

    use strict;
    use warnings;

    use experimental 'signatures';

    sub fetch_reindeer ($self, $name) {
        ...
    }

We can feed it into C<sigfix>

    shell$ sigfix -i -t plain ReindeerFactory.pm

And get out the transformed version:

    #!perl
    package ReindeerFactory;

    use strict;
    use warnings;



    sub fetch_reindeer { my ($self, $name) = @_;
        ...
    }

C<sigfix> has worked hard to not change the line numbers code in the source code
(so when the elves ship the generated version of their code out to Father Time
any error messages will line up with the line numbers in the original version
in git).  The C<experimental> line has been totally stripped (meaning that this
code will work now on older versions of perl that don't ship with that module.)

With the right C<find> command the elves could C<-exec> C<sigfix> on all their
source code and make it shippable in seconds.

=head2 For Us Mere Mortals

While this is useful for the elves in removing the I<experimental> C<subroutine>
feature as a matter of policy, the main advantage for most of us comes from
being able to produce code that'll run on older versions of Perl that don't
support subroutine signatures.  It means that we can use subroutine signatures
in our development environments and still produce a shippable version of our
code that will run on older perls.

If only there was a way to remove other more modern features like C<say>, C<//>,
C<state>, etc too...you know, that sounds like something I could write about in
another article...
