Title: Perl in the Browser
Topic: WebPerl
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

"Busted Presents!", Tinsle Gumdrop complained. "I I<hate> re-writing code."

It was Tinsle's job to port a whole bunch of backend validation logic code from
their Perl based internet web app to the JavaScript front end so the validation
could run client side too.

"I bet those Valentine's cherubs who code in Node don't have this problem",
she thought to herself.  "At least they can run the same code on the
server and in the browser."

If only there was a way to run I<Perl> code within the browser also...

=head2 WebPerl

The JavaScript engines in modern web browsers are crazy powerful optimized
insanity - even on occasion shipping an entire LLVM compiler to just in
time compile the JavaScript code down into native instructions in order to
get native performance.

In order to help get this level of performance you can use
L<asm.js|http://asmjs.org/> - a specialist subset of JavaScript to represent low
level operations that the JavaScript engine can easily compile down to native
code.  Or, if your modern browser supports it (like recent versions of Chrome,
Firefox, Safari and IE do) you can skip the JavaScript representation entirely
and use a machine independent binary format to describe operations the
JavaScript engine should run with L<WebAssembly|https://webassembly.org/>.

It's possible to compile C code using L<Emscripten|http://emscripten.org> to produce JavaScript code
or WebAssembly that (when further automatically compiled for JIT performance in
the browser) will run at near-native speed.  Of course, Tinsel doesn't want to
run any C based code in the browser - she wants to run Perl code.  What you need
to run Perl code is perl - the Perl interpreter - which, as luck would have it,
is itself a C based program.  So using Enscripten we can compile a version of
perl that can be used, with a bunch of shims and bridges, to execute Perl code
embedded in our HTML source code.

This all sounds like a lot of work - or would be, if L<Hauke Dämpfling's|https://www.zero-g.net/#about>
L<WebPerl project|https://webperl.zero-g.net/> hadn't done all the hard work for us
already.  All we need to do to run Perl code is include a single script tag in
our HTML linking to a JavaScript file containing the precompiled perl
interpreter and suddenly we're able to write Perl code directly in our webpages.

=head2 A working example

For fun, let's write some code to generate Fibonacci numbers in our browser...in
Perl.

    #!vim html
    <html>
        <head>
            <script src="https://webperlcdn.zero-g.net/v0.07-beta/webperl.js"
            integrity="sha256-jL8SB7St5ou4+hb0frK0k6VCQXsWQ1wolDrdU7i4juc="
            crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
            <script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.3.1.min.js"
            integrity="sha256-FgpCb/KJQlLNfOu91ta32o/NMZxltwRo8QtmkMRdAu8="
            crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
        </head>
        <body>
            fib(
                <input id="in" type="number" min="1" max="49">
            ) = <span id="out"></span>

            <script type="text/perl">
                use Memoize qw( memoize );
                sub fib {
                    return 1 if $_[0] <= 2;
                    return fib($_[0] - 1) + fib($_[0] - 2);
                }
                memoize('fib');

                my $jq = js('jQuery');
                $jq->('#in')->on('change', sub {
                    $jq->('#out')->text(
                        fib( $jq->('#in')->val )
                    );
                });
            </script>
        </body>
    </html>

=for html
  <p>Assuming you're reading this article with a recent web browser then this code is entirely runnable directly <a href="fib.html">in the browser</a>.</p>

There's a lot to unpack in this dense example:

=over

=item *

At the very top of the script we load the webperl code from the webperl
CDN.  We don't even have to host this on our own server.

=item *

Once we've done that we're able to use a special form of the C<< <script> >>
tag to write Perl code in our webpage by using the C<type="text/perl">
attribute.

=item *

We're even able to load core modules from within our embedded Perl code.
In the example above we load L<Memoize> to cache the output of the
C<fib> function so our code runs efficiently.

=item *

It's possible to run JavaScript within our Perl code using the C<js(...)>
function.  In the above example we're just evaluating C<jQuery> to get
a reference to the jQuery function we can then use to access jQuery
within Perl.

=item *

The bridge between Perl and JavaScript is pretty flexible.  Here we're executing
the jQuery function from within Perl, calling a further method on the result on
what it returns, and then we're even passing an anonymous Perl subroutine to
jQuery as a callback it should execute whenever the input field changes.
Remember, jQuery has no idea that it's being called from and itself is calling
Perl code at all!

=back

=head2 Alls Well That Ends Well

In the end Tinsel was able to copy and paste the more complex logic from the backend
Perl code without having to rewrite any of it (and avoiding adding additional
logic bugs along the way.)

With the extra time she had saved, she was able to take advantage of another
Enscripten project - a compile of L<Quake 3|http://www.quakejs.com> to run
in the browser.
