Title: Merry Christmas
Topic: Merry Christmas
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

=encoding utf8

=for :html
So here we are, Merry Christmas!<br>
Everybody's been having fun!<br>
Look to the future now<br>
It's only just begun

So concludes the 19th year of the Perl Advent Calendar.  We're already looking
forward to the big two zero next year (and if you're inspired by this year
it's never to early to L<sign up as an author|http://cfp.perladvent.org/>
for next year's calendar.) In the meantime I owe a tremendous debt of gratitude
to everyone who's written an article (some people two or three), helped with
the hosting, and to those that sent us pull requests for my many many typos
or provided improvements and clarifications on articles.  So, without further
ado let me thank:

=for :html
<li>Andrew Solomon</li>
<li>Barbie</li>
<li>Branislav Zahradník</li>
<li>Dave Cross</li>
<li>E. Choroba</li>
<li>Jos&eacute; Joaqu&iacute;n Atria</li>
<li>Joel Berger</li>
<li>Mohammad S Anwar</li>
<li>Nick Tonkin</li>
<li>Pete Houston</li>
<li>Ricardo Signes</li>
<li>Tony Edwardson</li>

I literally couldn't have done it without you people, so thank you from the
bottom of my heart.

Of course, as has been the case for many years now, this isn't the only
technology advent calendar.  There's several more calendars about Perl that
if you haven't been following I urge you to head off and enjoy:

=for :html
<ul>
<li><a href="https://perl6advent.wordpress.com/">Perl 6 Advent Calendar</a></li>
<li><a href="https://perl6.online/">Perl 6 one-liners Advent Calendar</a></li>
<li><a href="https://mojolicious.io/">Mojolicious Advent Calendar</a></li>
<li><a href="http://advent.perldancer.org/2018">Perl Dancer Advent Calendar</a></li>
</ul>

However, you shouldn't stop with just Perl.  These days there's a
plethora of technology advent calendars that's worth reading and are
aggregated at L<Advent Planet|http://www.lenjaffe.com/AdventPlanet/>

Finally, if you love Perl, and the fact that you've been reading these
calendars indicates you do, consider supporting the ongoing development of
Perl with a L<donation|https://perlfoundation.z2systems.com/np/clients/perlfoundation/donation.jsp>
to the Perl Foundation.  You could even set up a reoccurring payment as an
early New Year's resolution.

Merry Christmas from me to yours, and a Happy New Year.

Mark.
