Title: DBD::mysql versus DBD::MariaDB
Topic: DBD::MariaDB
Author: E. Choroba <choroba@cpan.org>

=encoding utf8

To connect to their MySQL database from Perl, the elves had always used the
L<DBD::mysql|https://metacpan.org/pod/DBD::mysql> module. It worked
with the MariaDB fork, too.

Recently, the new module
L<DBD::MariaDB|https://metacpan.org/pod/DBD::MariaDB> had been
released.  They'd been some confusion at the North Pole...Which one should
they use?

Minty Cakesprinkler had been to The Perl Conference in Glasgow 2018 and
seen a a L<lightning
talk|http://act.perlconference.org/tpc-2018-glasgow/talk/7509> 
(L<video|https://youtu.be/xGishnF1bQI?t=351>,
L<slides|http://choroba.matfyz.cz/18-light>), and was able to explain
to his fellow elves the advantages of the new module.

=head2 Why you should switch

=over 4

=item *

DBD::mysql has problems to compile with the recent MySQL and MariaDB
clients (versions 8.0+ and 10.2.4+, respectively).

=item *

The original module can use insecure connection even if you requested
it connect securely, see
L<CVE-2017-10789|https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2017-10789>.
This can lead to a man-in-the-middle attack. The new one refuses to
connect if secure connection was requested but it can’t be provided.

=item *

The new module fixes
L<CVE-2017-10788|https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2017-10788>
which allowed remote attacker to cause a denial of service
(use-after-free), also causing test failures on some platforms.

=item *

There are several more vulnerabilities that the new module fixes (e.g.
workarounds for
L<CVE-2015-3152|https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-3152>,
L<CVE-2017-3305|https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2017-3305>,
or
L<CVE-2018-2767|https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2018-2767>).

=item *

Unicode is fully supported in the new module and uses the standard
Perl Unicode model, i.e. when writing code you always use decoded
Unicode strings. Recent L<DBD::Pg|https://metacpan.org/pod/DBD::Pg>
and L<DBD::SQLite|https://metacpan.org/pod/DBD::SQLite> implement the
same behaviour.

=item *

The new module has better support for prepared statements and bind
parameters.

=back

For a more detailed overview, visit the
L<Changes|https://metacpan.org/changes/release/PALI/DBD-MariaDB-1.00>.

=head2 Why you shouldn’t switch

=over 4

=item *

The way how DBD::mysql handled Unicode was broken. It’s possible that
switching to the new module would break your application, returning
suddenly double encoded UTF-8 strings. Fixing a database where some
values are encoded incorrectly is an uneasy task and the risk of
breaking the data completely might prevent you from making such a
decision.

=back

=head2 History

If you’d like to understand the reasons why DBD::mysql was forked, you
can read L<this thread at
PerlMonks|https://www.perlmonks.org/index.pl?node_id=1223996>.
Basically, the most critical fixes were originally applied to
DBD::mysql, but because of the reason described here under I<Why you
shouldn’t switch>, they were reverted. The L<GoodData
company|https://www.gooddata.com> couldn’t wait for months, so they
decided to fork the module.

Various combinations of Perl, server and client versions are continuously
tested in L<Travis CI|https://travis-ci.org/gooddata/DBD-MariaDB>.
Currently, there are 158 different combinations.

=head2 Notes

You can report any problems or submit your pull requests to the
L<GitHub repository|https://github.com/gooddata/DBD-MariaDB>.

Thanks to Pali for fixing the issues and
L<GoodData|https://gooddata.com> for supporting contribution to open
source.

=cut
