Title: Legacy code strikes again
Topic: Context::Singleton
Author: Branislav Zahradník <barney@cpan.org>

It's 3 o'clock in the morning. Our poor programmer is finally asleep.
It's the run up to Christmas and work has been hectic with the increased
website traffic.  But all is good.  All is well.  And finally the
programmer can dream of a life where...

I<ding ding, ding ding>

"Our databases are stuck AGAIN, we are NOT delivering, do something! NOW!"

Bleary eyed our protagonist rolls out of bed and logs into the production
systems. Our programmer-soon-hero-again has discovered that
database servers are overloaded with unused connections.

=head2 Code architecture

In order to process every gift delivery the code has to access several
databases:

=for :html
<ul>
<li>The delivery queue database</li>
<li>The accounting department database</li>
<li>The legal department database</li>
<li>The compliance database</li>
</ul>

The location of every database for every gift's delivery region is
located in the central key-value storage, which at least is holding
up under the increased website traffic.

The problem is that gift processing opens all four connections
when it first it starts up keeping the connections open idle between
gift processing.   With the increased workload during the run up to
Christmas there's too many processes with open database connections!

=head2 Refactoring

If our programmer is ever going to get a full night's sleep, he has
to refactor the code quickly.

The solution is "easy".  Do lazy connections!  While the code
is off doing other things that don't involve accessing the
database there's no reason it should have the connections open.

=head3 Naive solution

The naive solution would be to connect only when needed - making
a new connection in each function that needs to access the
database.

    #!perl 
    sub foo {
        my $delivery_queue_db = delivery_queue_connect( @_ );
        ...
    }

    sub bar {
        if (my $delivery_queue_db = delivery_queue_connect( @_ )) {
            ...
        }
    }

Unfortunately that makes the performance even worse! The same connection
is required by many independent parts of the code and reconnecting
in every single function overloads the database server even more!

=head3 OOP refactoring

In an ideal world our programmer would refactor the code to work in
an object orientated fashion so that each database connection is available
from an object accessor only where it was needed.

Unfortunately that is going to be a B<huge> amount of work.  The
programmer did a bit of estimating, and figured out he could get
it all done by the end of March...and he's like to sleep sometime
before then.

=head3 Legacy solution

One solution is to make use of global variables, and I<localize> them
so they're automatically cleared up as execution leaves scope (and the
database connections will automatically be dropped)

For example.

    #!perl
    # our global package variables
    our ($delivery_queue_db, $accounting_db, ...);

    # do the bit of code that needs the same database connections
    sub handle_gift {
        # localize the connections so when we leave scope they'll
        # be automatically cleared up
        local ($delivery_queue_db, $accounting_db, ...);

        # use functions that connect to the various databases
        # the first time a connection to the database is needed
        record_shipping_timeline(...);
        update_stock_count(...);
        ...
    }

    # some code that is eventually called by something
    # record_shipping_timeline eventually calls
    sub calculate_shipping_method {
        # in each function that needs a connection to the
        # database we connect if we need to if the global variable
        # doesn't already have a connection
        $delivery_queue_db //= delivery_queue_connect( @_ );

        ...
    }

It's a lot better. Now the database connections aren't created until
the very point they're about to be used.  But it's still a lot of
additional code to maintain, and the programmer will have well over
100 such parameters.

And now he will also have to extend every function with connectivity information,
or make that yet another global variable too.

Trembling between 100 variables, 10_000 functions and who knows how many lines of code
our programmer suddenly hears something start to whisper.  Has the sleep deprivation
finally sent him over the edge?

... "Use me, search me, use me, search me"

"Is it you, Almighty CPAN? Do you have solution for me?"

"Take a look at Context::Singleton"

=head3 Curiosity driven development solution

L<Context::Singleton> is a way of handling shared state in a
much more controlled and organized fashion.  It handles the
localization and allows a centralized place for declaring
a I<recipe> for deducing shared state when it's first needed.

    #!perl
    # define a recipe for deducing the delivery_queue_db
    # whenever we need it
    contrive 'delivery_queue_db' => (
        dep => [qw[ gift ... ]],
        as => sub { my ($gift, ...) = @_; ... },
    );

    sub foo {
        # get the delivery_queue_db for the current frame
        # calling the logic in contrive to create a new
        # connection if that hasn't already happened this frame
        my $delivery_queue_db = deduce 'delivery_queue_db';
        ...
    }

    sub bar {
        # this is the same thing as in foo above - getting
        # the delivery_queue_db for the current frame and
        # using the logic in contrive to do create a new
        # connection if delivery_queue_db doesn't exist in
        # the current frame, but here we're also using
        # try_deduce to see if we have all the dependencies
        # to do that first
        if (try_deduce 'delivery_queue_db') {
            my $delivery_queue_db = deduce 'delivery_queue_db';
            ...
        }
    }

    sub handle_gift {
        # start a new context.  Things that we deduce will be
        # cleared up when execution leaves the frame
        frame {
            # declare the gift in our current frame.  Now
            # we don't have to pass it around to the functions
            # that we call from within the frame since they
            # can access it via the context singleton keywords
            proclaim 'gift' => $gift;

            ...;
        }
    }

By using Context::Singleton our programmer has removed four arguments from every
important function - resulting largest code reducing commit in the project
history!

Each connection is now created first time it is needed and persisted till end
of the frame.  The programmer's system finally works again, and
gifts are being delivered.

This approach even allowed a long desired optimization (previously not
implemented due to "argument hell") so now it's most likely system will handle
even next Christmas' load ...

=head2 How it works

L<Context::Singleton> offers data control mechanism similar to C<my> variable
within code blocks, but independent of code architecture and execution flow.
Things within the frame will always exist just until the end of the frame
so will be cleared up automatically avoiding globals existing throughout
the entire codebase.

It affords reasonable caching as well - derived properties are stored
in same C<frame> as their requirements.  In our case, C<delivery_queue_db>
will always be populated in same frame as C<gift> value was set.

It provides multiple ways how to populate variables based on availability
of other variables.  The simple C<contrive> example above is just one
simple implementation - Context::Singleton also allows you to specify recipies
where you can specify class names, builder methods to be called, or defaults
and values.

It handles a lot of the complex stuff hand rolling a simple solution with
a combination of the C<local> keyword and accessor subroutines can't
handle alone:  It gives immutability on scope, and can build values based
on dependencies.  With dependency tracking it can rebuild them in inner
scope when their dependencies have been modified!  And it is able to handle
cyclic dependencies as well.

One way to think about it is that it acts like C<$_> providing "default object"
where every deducible property acts like method (with some kind of multi-dispatch)
though you can compose specific classes as you need using / providing different
C<contrive> recipes.

See
L<TPC in Amsterdam presentation|https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KBQ0prTu5ys>
(L<slides|https://rawgit.com/happy-barney/slides/master/2017-08-09%20-%20TPCiA%20-%20Context%20Singleton/src/tpcia-2017-08-09-context-singleton.html>)
for more.
