Title: Christmas Quoting
Topic: B::perlstring
Author: Mark Fowler <mark@twoshortplanks.com>

"Today," Buddy Snowbeard explained to his Elf class, "I'm going to I<change your
world>."

"Not by teaching you anything earth shattering.  Oh no, because becoming an
effective programmer isn't about making giant leaps, from awesome framework to
awesome framework. It's about learning the little things each day, that make
your life easier."

"Today", Buddy intoned with undue seriousness, "I'm going to teach you how to
print out a variable!"

The groans from the class were audible.  The class knew this.  It'd been covered
in Perl Programming 101 back in Elf kindergarten.  They were sixth graders for
Santa's sake, and this was like teaching granny elf to suck candy.

"Now I all know what you're thinking", Buddy continued, "but listen to me for a
second."

He tapped the board: "I see a lot of elves out there printing variables out like
this:"

    #!perl
    say STDERR 'DEBUG: The next $childname is '.$childname;

"And you're saying to yourselves what's wrong with that? Plenty! Plenty is wrong
with that."

"You in the front, Noelle Toffeecane what is the problem here?"

"Er," Noelle stammered, "you can't tell where the thing you're printing out
starts and end?"

"Very good Miss Toffecane.  I guess we could change it to something like this:"

    #!perl
    say STDERR 'DEBUG: The next $childname is "'.$childname.'"';

"Of course this still has problems.  What might they be Cookie Flippyfeast?"

"The childname could have like a double quote in it? You know, it could, like,
um mess it up like?  So you'll be like, I have no idea where this even starts
and ends like?"

"Eloquently put Mr Flippyfeast.  And why might C<$childname> have a double
quote in it? Because it could I<like> have anything in it I<like>.  After all
that's why you're printing it out.  To debug it.  Skittle Dreamwish what else
could be in the string that'd mess up our output?"

"A newline?"

"Good.  Another Fruity Flippywarmth?"

"A unicode character"

"Yes!  And you'd be trusting your terminal to render the sequence out - you'd
have no way of telling exactly what character sequence was actually in the
string.  What other character might our terminal get confusd with Tiny Plumhat?"

"A control character sir, you could end up turning the whole terminal red on
green. Though that would look festive sir."

"Indeed, but it wouldn't help with your debugging. In fact, let's create a truly
naughty string to print out."

    #!perl
    use Term::ANSIColor;
    my $childname = color('red on_green');
    $childname .= "Larry the \N{SNOWMAN}";
    $childname .= '\n"';

"What do we need to do before  we print it out - you in the back - Stripes
Dreamfeast isn't it?"

"You need to escape it sir.  I'd use Data::Dumper"

"And How would that look Mr Dreamfest? Let's write it up on the board."

    #!perl
    use Data::Dumper;
    say STDERR 'DEBUG: The next $childname is '. Dumper($childname)

"But even with a nice string that'll print out something like this"

    DEBUG: The next $childname is $VAR1 = 'Larry Wall';

"Not exactly what we want.  We can do better?  Any ideas Dash Sleepyhat?"

"There are options for Data::Dumper, sir.  We can pretty much make it do
whatever we want"

"Yes you can.  But can I<you> remember them off of the top of your head?  I
certainly can't. And I don't want to write three lines of options in front of
every debug statement I use.  What's another module we could use?  Anyone?"

The class was silent.  Eventually a small elf called Mistle Ivybell raised his hand
at the back.  "Data::Printer, sir?"

"Data::Printer is a good choice Mr Ivybell, but it wasn't exactly what I was
looking for.  I'm thinking of something instead that's always installed and
ships with perl?  Anyone?"

No hands went up.

"Oh surely some of you must have heard of the B module?  It allows you to do
internal like things with Perl.  And one of the things it has is get a
Perl string representation of any string.  Let's see how this works:"

    #!perl
    use B qw(perlstring);
    say STDERR 'DEBUG: The next $childname is '. perlstring($childname)

"And that print out something - if not nice, since we didn't gave it such
a naughty string to start with - at least unambiguously understandable"

    DEBUG: The next $childname is "\x{1b}[31;42mLarry the \x{2603}\""

Just then the bell rang.

"That's all for today class!  Don't forget your test scripts are due by
the end of the week!"

